+++
issue = "015"
title = "Is There Any Hope For The Specialist?"
author = "Seth Wiggins"
date = "2009-03-17"
+++

I started playing for Seattle's Sockeye in the Spring of 2007. Among the great
athletes and throwers and minds one thing stood out the most—an almost
singular obsession on beating their main rival, Vancouver's Furious George.
Throwers needed to have five options because at nationals, against Furious,
you could be sure four would not be open. Three-step separations were not
enough, because Oscar and Alex could make it one. Running trap zone? With
Savage and Cruickshank with the disc? Not likely. Any man-to-man against a
cutter like MG would need a lot of help on the mark.  
  
Cool story Hansel, but what's the point? That Seattle team had players who
using solely what they do best could walk to semis at nationals. Disc to Ben
to CK x 15 x 5. But what would happen when they got there? What happens when
that team comes up against another that can stop their best option?  
  
If you can beat a team going to your number one option over and over again
then that team, relative to yours, is bad. Either they don't have the
personnel to match your athleticism, experience, or whatever it is you are
beating them with, or they are not smart enough to make that necessary
adjustment to stop getting beat. Either way; they're bad. So bad, in fact,
that you probably would be able to beat that team using any strategy you
choose—what's winning the game isn't just your one play or move, rather it's
your 'specialty' combined with the threat of everything else you could do.  
  
Think about elimination games between two close teams—how many times does one
team actually use their 'specialty'? The top handler throwing long to the best
receiver works, if they are both playing great, maybe three times.
Significant, yes, but they still need 12 other ways to score. Deeps will be
backed (defender positioned between the player and the endzone), and throwers
will be faced straight-up. The best one-on-one defenders, who already get beat
plenty, can stop only their assignment; there are six others. This applies
just as well to team's specializing in using players solely to their
strengths: Teams that live on breaking the mark find non-mark defenders
adjusting to the dead side. A team's best defensive line playing their best
defense will generate maybe two or three additional blocks a game - which
probably isn't enough as it is, and they only have those seven players to
score.  
  
During those games, being a 'specialist' in this sport really means that other
parts of you game will be proportionally easier. The better your specialty,
the more your opponent will give up to stop it, but remember—good teams always
will be able to. Then what? The backed deep threat will be given cuts back to
the disc. But to be effective, first their cut has to be well-timed, and then
they have to be able to throw the disc somewhere. Being able to make well-
timed cuts either away or back to the disc, and being able to throw
afterwards? Sounds fairly all-around to me. A great zone defensive team will
soon find the opposing team's best throwers making the majority of the throws,
and be forced to defend person-to-person, necessitating the ability to do
both. The best mark-breaker will be countered not only with better marks, but
also more effort preventing them from catching the disc, either by greater
athleticism in their defender, poaching, or both. Again, both the players and
teams involved are all dependent on both their relative strengths and
weaknesses. Against a good team, neither the team nor individual is good
enough to rely on their specialty alone.  
  
Of course conversely, the better your opponent, the less they will need to
sacrifice in order to take away your strength. Further, its easier for your
opponent to focus on stopping your strength than your next options. Seattle
knew that while relying on their best option would work early in tournaments,
in those last two games, there would be teams with players that could stop it.
What led to their successes was their singular focus on beating teams with
players able to stop what they otherwise would do. Or, in other words,
becoming an all-around team, filled with all-around players.
