+++
issue = "015"
title = "Roles Can Be Difficult To Observe"
author = "Jeff Eastham-Anderson"
date = "2009-03-17"
+++

Apart from specific match-ups on defense that require certain roles (being
tall and fast, or short and quick), there are lots of roles in zone defenses
and in some offensive sets. The best example I can think of is the marker on a
trap-side zone defense. This is the position that anchors the zone when it is
within 5 yards of the sideline, and can make or break the scheme. This person
has the opportunity to take away more options that any other defensive player
on the field. As the mark applies more pressure, there is a cascade behind
them that allows the defense to take away other opportunities. For example, if
the mark is able to remove cross-field hammers, the far-side defender(s) can
play more to the middle of the field, allowing the players in the middle of
the field to push closer to the open side threats.  
  
Should players train to be more versatile? I don't think there is an absolute
answer here. In a vacuum of information I would argue that as a player looking
to make a team, you should invest in improving at all aspects of the game.
Simply put; offensive lines still need to play defense, and defensive lines
need to score after they get a turn in order to be successful. The world's
best thrower would be hard pressed to make the roster of an elite team if they
couldn't play decent match-up defense. You can argue that offensive lines
don't need to be great at defense, especially if they don't turn the disc
over, but you'd have to seriously question the wisdom of a defensive line with
seven people unable to throw the disc.  
  
If you are a player trying to make it onto a team that generally lacks a
skill, or you are in charge of recruiting for a team that lacks a certain
skill, by all means, train or recruit to address that weakness. As a team this
means figuring out, before you pick your team, how you want to play the game.
As a player this means trying to figure out, or asking the team leaders, what
the team needs in a player.  
  
Regarding important roles, I don't really know if any trends will emerge.
However, I think there is a real opportunity for teams to improve by
recruiting or training players to be smarter about their decisions, and to
recognize opportunities earlier. There are some pretty significant hurdles to
training athletes to make better decisions, but it is even harder to recruit
smart players. For example, teaching the concept of creating space for a
teammate to take advantage of is a fundamentally good thing. However, it is
very hard to teach, is rarely recognized on a team as being important, and
even more rarely rewarded when a teams is picking their roster.  
  
I think the newly instituted roster limits gives increased hope for all-around
players, especially if the limit drops much further. With fewer spots on the
roster, the argument for filling those spots with players that are proficient
at both offense and defense becomes stronger. In an extreme example, if the
roster limit was 14 and your roster was evenly split between defensive and
offensive specialists, you'd be pretty hosed if somebody got hurt, or was off
their game that day. A roster with a couple people that could fit into any
hole would be more desirable.
