+++
issue = "015"
title = "Roles From Necessity"
author = "Kirk Savage"
date = "2009-03-17"
+++

This is an interesting topic as the need for specialized roles has been born
more out of necessity than out of desire in Vancouver.  
  
Historically, the top players on Furious have been the players who excel at
multiple aspects of the game. These players have been able to fulfill multiple
roles, and truly have a very strong all-around game. Ultimate's fast pace of
play combined with multiple turnovers and unforeseen situations, calls for
players on the field to be able to adapt and excel regardless of the
circumstances.  
  
However, it is impossible to field a team of 7 "Al-Bobs"* every O or D line.
Over the years, as the top players on Furious have retired, our team has been
forced to move to specialized positions in order to continue to compete with
the other top teams. This is a short term and problematic fix. I am sure that
other teams have faced a situation where a player who is tall and who plays
good defense is inserted into the lineup as a starting line defensive lane
cutter—even if they are a poor thrower. We try to hide their weaknesses by
surrounding them with more all-around players who can shoulder the offensive
load on a turnover.  
  
The same holds true on the other side of the disc. Teams are forced to play
offensive players who are talented throwers—at the expense of athleticism and
defensive ability. However, unless more high-level games go the route of the
2002 Semis with DoG and Furious (5 turnovers combined)—teams that rely on
highly specialized personnel will eventually be exposed and struggle to
compete for the UPA Championship.  
  
In short, it is very important to work to become an all-around player. If you
are relying on one part of your game to make a team, or to be on a starting
lineup, or to win championships then you are not giving yourself the best
chance for success. It is too easy for one part of your game to escape you on
the big day, and you may need to rely on some of your other skills to get the
job done.
