+++
issue = "015"
title = "Using The Best Part Of Each Player"
author = "Miranda Roth"
date = "2009-03-17"
+++

The best example of a role player on Riot is Michelle Bowlen. Michelle is very
tall (5'11"), well-trained in fundamentals and particularly smart (Fulbright
Scholar!). She doesn't have the best break-mark throws in the game and can't
guard every quick little handler. However, she is the scariest mark I've ever
seen in a 1-3-3. Luckily, we play in bad weather conditions at Sectionals,
Regionals and Nationals (usually) so we can run a lot of zone. We will often
put Michelle in just to run the 1 in the 1-3-3 for one point and then do it
again the next time we're on defense.  
  
I believe that the best players all start with a superpower. Michelle's is her
zone mark. Surge is really fast. Vivian can throw anywhere on the field at
anytime. This is a great starting point for each player, but that doesn't mean
that they shouldn't all also continue to work on reading the disc, downfield
defense or dump cuts. In a game, we will always use a player's specialty, but
the more well-rounded they are around that, the better they will be able to
perform in multiple situations.  
  
In the next 5 years at the level of elite women's ultimate, I see the most use
for the combination of two roles within one player. For example, someone who
can throw anywhere at will, but is also a very athletic defender. Right now
there are lots of athletes and lots of throwers, but rarely are these combined
(Deb Cussen is the prototype). I think that there will always be roles for
all-around players. I would still suggest that all-around players work on
something that they want to be their superpower—playing defense on the other
teams tallest player, winning every disc in the air, or being able to make 10
cuts at top speed during one point—but then also developing other parts of
their game to make themselves the best all-around defender as possible and to
be as difficult to guard as possible.
