+++
issue = "027"
title = "Eliminate 2-3 Breaks A Game"
author = "Brett Matzuka"
date = "2010-03-24"
+++

_Preface:_ Ever since I started playing competitive Ultimate, I have been on
the D team. So, receiving the pull isn't something that I have partaken in
very often. That being said, I have done it and can give a viewpoint from a
defensive standpoint.  
  
Most important and crucial part of receiving the pull is the reception. I mean
pure and simple, having someone there to initially catch the disc. From an
offensive standpoint, catching the pull is where the offense begins. This is
analogous to the inbounds pass in basketball; if you can't confidently,
successfully inbound the ball, you are going to have some unnecessary
turnovers. The offense wants to catch the disc and get it moving right away
whether for a set play, or string, or just to gain easy ground before the
defense sets up. Whether due to miscommunication or a lack of confidence in
catching, a pull hitting soil is starting off on the wrong foot for an
offensive team.  
  
In terms of how many should be back for this procedure and where they are
positioned is determined by what offensive structure your team uses. For a
horizontal, I would typically have one back to receive the disc and then two
secondary handler options which form a triangle from the initial reception.
Behind this, downfield, would be the normal horizontal stack. Procedurally, I
would have an outside handler receive the pull, hit one of the two upfield
options, and fill in to the outside of the person they had just thrown to
(figure provided). The main purpose of this is get the disc to the center of
the field to help open up space. This also gives the handlers, and offense, a
routine to follow. Psychologically, this is a good way to forget what has
happened in the game up till now and get refocused on the current point; watch
any professional tennis player before he/she serves and notice that they
bounce the ball the same number of times before each serve, or watch a
basketball player before a free throw.  
  
For a vertical stack, I would maintain have one handler back to receive the
pull and a handler upfield, in the middle, as a first option. From here, you
can either fall into the offense, or follow the string called.  
  
Lastly, I remember a quote from my previous captain, Jonathan Potts, that is
meaningful in this circumstance.  
  
_"A good puller is worth 2-3 breaks a game."_  
  
If your offensive team can work out a system to make this statement irrelevant
to your team, then I would say you know how to receive the pull.
