+++
issue = "027"
title = "Respond As It Comes"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2010-03-24"
+++

The best offensive teams can get big yards from the first few passes off a
pull, and immediately knock the defense on its heels. There are no shortage of
ways to do this, and the best offenses I have been a part of have always had a
few options for taking this advantage.  
  
In all cases the critical first component is having a player who feels
comfortable catching the pull and throwing the first pass. This person should
feel confident catching passes while backing up, getting in front of rollers,
and in general putting themselves in that position where they may make the
mistake, and might not get noticed for doing their job correctly. So often I
see the catcher shy away from a difficult catch, let the disc hit the ground,
then gather it and throw the first pass. This second or two that is lost is a
tremendous advantage to the defense.  
  
Some teams I have been on have a variety of plays to attack the sidelines or
the middle of the field, and can work on isolations, or on group movement to
create an advantage for the offense. In most cases these are very simple
plays, and so really only require a bit of practice time to get familiar with,
and a few scrimmages to get comfortable executing. Other teams have been very
simple, with just one pull play and then an option in case that play doesn't
go off. Sometimes this simplicity is very helpful, but the simplicity also
requires all the players to be aware of what is developing so they can execute
the backup plan together. At any rate, there are a variety of options
available to a team, and even a novice captain should be able to draw up one
or two simple ones for his team, with a simple flood one side and execute a
string of passes to set players being the most universal/basic.  
  
I think the only adjustment that needs to be made in response to wind would be
to designate the side of the field that the play will be run to before the
pull comes. By specifying the side of the field you can put your offense in
the position where they have an easier reset, or where the deep throw is most
favorable for the wind. In general, however, responding to the pull as it
comes will be dynamic enough to keep the defense on their heels and give the
offense the best possible chance to score by giving a well-designed play the
most space to work with.
