+++
issue = "009"
title = "For Your Team, Not Your Teammates"
author = "Ryan Morgan"
date = "2008-09-09"
+++

Sub-calling, especially for one who one who plays at the same time, is one of
the most difficult things to do. Personally, I hate doing it because I feel
like it distracts me from my ability to remain focused while playing. But like
everyone, I always have my own feelings about who should be playing at a
particular time. Fortunately, as captain of my team, my opinion about who
plays carries a bit of weight with the sub-caller. What I've learned is that
the ideal sub-callers understand that they have a duty to the team rather than
to their teammates, demonstrate objectivity and detachedness in performing
that duty, and have an ability to quickly evaluate changing conditions.  
  
Of course when playing time is not distributed equally, there will always be
someone who is disappointed with the sub-caller's decisions. Dealing with
these types of complaints can be uncomfortable because they require explaining
to a friend why you chose to play someone else instead of him or her. I think
there are four things that the sub-caller has to do in these situations:  
  
**1.** Delay the discussion until after the game. Because of everything that a
sub-caller needs to concentrate on during the game, complaints simply cannot
be dealt with until after the game because dealing with complaints would
disrupt effective sub calling.  
  
**2.** Listen to the player. Understand exactly what the complaint is. (Does
he believe he is not playing enough? Believe certain types of players are not
playing enough? Believe he is not playing enough at certain times (ie: zone)).
Listening is extremely important because you can tailor you answer to his
concerns. Also, sometimes part of the solution is for the player to know his
concerns have been taken seriously.  
  
**3.** Honestly explain the decision to keep that player off the field (you
haven't mastered this offense/defense in practice, you are not in condition,
you were limping that last point and wanted to give you some time to recover,
you displayed a string of bad decisions, the guy who played instead of you was
on fire/had a great match up).  
  
**4.** Identify what that player can work on to fix it. This communication is
very important because it gives the player a clear idea of what he has to
focus on to get better. When he gets better the team gets better.
