+++
issue = "009"
title = "My Sub-Calling Philosophies"
author = "Miranda Roth"
date = "2008-09-09"
+++

**1.** If you pick the right personnel, there will always be a time when you
can play each player. Think about when these times are for each player on your
team and allow them to excel in these situations.  
  
**2.** Be clear to your teammates about the team's sub-calling philosophy. If
it changes for a tournament, don't make it a hush hush operation—let everyone
know so nothing is a surprise.  
  
**3.** When at all possible, have someone who's not playing (a coach or
designated sub-caller, perhaps even an injured player) call subs. Sub-calling
and playing time create the most opportunities for team chemistry to breakdown
and when your playing time, which directly relates to most people's enjoyment
of their playing, is dictated by peers, it can get ugly, fast.  
  
**4.** Sub to win. At the elite level, everyone would rather be on a winning
team and play one point per game than be on a losing team and play five points
per game. Or at least we should—if people aren't on board with this—reconsider
their options, which is fine.  
  
**5.** Don't get caught up in specialization. I think this may apply even more
to Women's Ultimate than Open Ultimate, but if you have a good player on your
team, don't keep her in the "D line" or "O line" or "Zone" or whatever you
think she is best at if she might be able to help the team in lots of
different situations. The reality is that there will always be turnovers,
teams will always throw different D and O looks, so just play your strong
players that get the job done in all situations and be creative with their
supporting cast.
