+++
issue = "009"
title = "Prepare Your Team For The Hard Decisions"
author = "Mike Mullen"
date = "2008-09-09"
+++

It is a big point midway through a big game at the most important high school
elite open tourney of the year. The opposing team has taken a timeout between
points. You look at the team you coach to figure out what line you want in the
game. You know that a number of your kids haven't been in the game yet and
that they paid a lot of money to make the plane trip. Oh, and there are those
same kids' parents who also came along and have been making runs to the store
all weekend to make sure the team has everything that they need. You've been
coaching some of those kids since middle school and you've known the parents
for years because you coached their other child. Some of those great kids who
haven't played yet are seniors who played on JV for three years and have been
waiting for the chance to make the difference in helping the varsity win a
championship. Because you work with your feeder programs as well, you notice
that some of those other kids who haven't played are a couple of the freshmen
who were the stronger players on the 8th grade team last year. Those freshmen
love to compete and are going to be a big part of the team somewhere down the
road. They are dying to get into the game to show they can make plays at
important times in high school games. Everybody is looking at you with hopeful
eyes of helping the team succeed. What do you do?  
  
There are a lot of pressures on coaches. Calling subs is one of those
pressures. It is true in every team sport. Determining who actually gets to
play can be very distasteful. It probably ranks third in the down sides of
coaching behind a player getting seriously injured and having to cut people
from the team. The question is: "How do you deal with subbing to help the team
succeed?" Subbing is not a decision that is made in a vacuum of just this
particular point. There is always the bigger picture of keeping morale high,
keeping people invested in the program, keeping parents happy, and keeping the
administrators off your back. And the truly odd thing is that winning does not
cure all ills in a program. You can win championships and still be hammered on
your evaluations because winning isn't everything even when losing is
unacceptable.  
  
Back to the game. What do you do? Simple. You tell your power line and power
rotation that they are in the game and that they are not coming out until the
game is over or the other team obviously gives up. Are the players who haven't
gone in yet mad because they may not get to play in this game? How mad are the
parents who came to watch their kid play and their kid probably won't go in
the game? The answer is that people might be a little disappointed which is
natural and even desirable (you certainly don't want too many kids on the team
who want to sit out the big points), but the bottom line is that every player
on the team knows his role, as do the parents, because you have properly
prepared them for this moment.  
  
At the beginning of the season the coach needs to communicate with everyone
about the expectations of being on the varsity team and what it means.
Experienced coaches know the importance of putting it in writing, announcing
it at the team parent meeting, and repeating it often at practices and games.
Also, before and after every game you start your speech by pointing out how
important the players who are not getting or did not get in the game are to
the success of the team. You don't say this to be nice, you say it because it
is true. It is both a clich√© and very overlooked that being a team player is
of huge value. Your chances of succeeding are vastly increased if the players
who don't get much, if any, playing time, are as excited or more excited than
the players on the field when the team has success. Those role players have
very important roles in practices and games that are often overlooked by those
people only watching the games. One of the great things about ultimate is that
players on the sidelines can actually help the team succeed by communicating
important info to the players on the field.  
  
Back to the game. Is the power line ready to go in? Do the players in the
power rotation who are not in know that they are in the tighter rotation of
people playing these next all important points? Of course they do. You have
practiced and played with this rotation already in both practices and games.
Plus you have it written down on your subbing rotation sheet.  
  
So why rotations and not calling lines? There is the issue of players knowing
what to expect in situations so they can be prepared mentally. There is the
issue of a coach trying to call lines and make strategy adjustments at the
same time that just leads to the wrong players on the field and not so great
adjustments. And yes, coaches want to control the subs and the adjustments.
(There are two kinds of coaches when it comes to control. Those who are
obviously control freaks and those who are good at hiding that they are
control freaks). So, how do you get the right players on the field at the
right time while still being able to make strategy adjustments on the fly?
Well it obviously helps to have good assistant coaches who know what the plan
is, can take charge AND do not get flustered when the head coach overrules
them with an adjustment. But more importantly you have set up your rotations
beforehand.  
  
It can be as simple as ranking your players as ones, twos, or threes, with
ones being your strongest players. Usually you will have equal numbers of ones
and twos with only a couple of threes. You add an "H" for the handlers. You
then sort by rank. (I prefer a spreadsheet.) You communicate with everyone
about their rank and you practice with different rotations. The rank includes
both offensive and defensive talent. In HS elite ultimate you can generally
figure out how to make sure your least able defensive player on the field
doesn't mark up against the other teams' strongest offensive players. And
every kid on the team knows how to throw resets and easy scores (and to know
the difference between an easy score finish and a not-so-easy score finish) if
they get the disc on offense and are not a primary handler.  
  
Different kinds of rotations (Ones will rotate in for ones, twos for twos, and
threes for threes, in all rotations):

  * **Standard Rotation:** 1h, 1h, 1, 1, 2h, 2, 3
  * **Even Rotation:** 1h, 1h, 1, 2h, 2, 3, 3. (This can also be 1h, 1, 2h, 2h, 2, 3, 3)
  * **Power Rotation:** 1h, 1h, 1h, 1, 1, 1, 1 (Don't save the power rotation for late in games. Use it to get an early lead, to get the important breaks, to end a big game as quick as possible in tournament play)
  * **2/3 Rotation:** 2h, 2h, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3. (This group has practiced against the power rotation so they are comfortable playing together. If the power rotation has just run off four or five points against an opponent, put this rotation in and tell them they stay in until they give up a score.)
  * **Fun rotations:** Tall, Short, Seniors, 9/10, Soccer, Basketball.

  
If all goes well and you picked the correct rotations and made the proper
strategy adjustments you have put your team into a position where they have
found success on the field. It is not quite over yet, you still have to make a
good post game speech where you will mention the role players first and stress
how important they were to the success of the team. And when one of the
parents who has been working hard for your program and whose kid didn't play
in the big game comes up to you and says, "Hey coach, I asked my son how he
felt about not playing in that game and he explained to me that he was okay
with it because he knew his role and feels that he helped the team succeed as
much as the guys who were in the game. Nice job coach. I'll see you this
summer. My son is really looking forward to improving his skill set." Well,
you know that you will probably get to keep your job for another year. You get
three days before the high of winning the tournament wears off. Four days from
now you get to start thinking about next year by looking at the rotation
sheets to see how many points each kid played and what needs to be done for
next year.
