+++
issue = "009"
title = "Preparation"
author = "Matt Dufort"
date = "2008-09-09"
+++

First things firstâ€”calling subs for a competitive team is a big job. It will
take a lot away from anyone's playing ability. There may be someone out there
who can play at their best and call subs at the same time, but I haven't met
them. Because of this, I think it's better to split sub-calling duties between
two or three players, or expect that the person calling subs is not going to
play very much.  
  
To me, the most important element of sub-calling is being prepared. You should
know pretty well before the tournament starts who's going to play, how much,
and in what situations. You need to leave room for adjustment based on how
each person is playing at the moment, but having an idea beforehand is a huge
help.  
  
Sub-calling sheets are great. A simple grid works well, with the players
listed on the side, and points across the top. You can easily see how many
points each person's played, how long they've been in or out. Grouping
handlers, cutters, defenders together also helps. It's pretty easy to add
basic stats to such a grid, and to get your next line ready during the point.
In a game with strict time limits, you should ideally have an O line and a D
line ready before the point ends. If you need to change one or two people,
that's much easier than picking a full seven.  
  
When it comes to picking players for each line, subbing should be strategic,
over the course of the game and the tournament. If your defense is forcing
lots of turnovers but having trouble scoring, you can bring over a more
offensive-minded player. In general, you want your best players to be in when
you need them, but rested enough that they're still going strong in finals or
that last backdoor game of Regionals. This strategy will vary depending on
your team's composition, but here's one example of what I mean.  
  
For many of its years at the top of the Open ultimate scene, Furious George
has been a top-heavy team. Their best five or six players were better than
anyone else's, and they knew it. But they couldn't play those guys every
point, so most of the time they'd mix them in with role players (who were,
granted, also very good). A couple times a game, they'd put most or all of
their strongest players in for one defensive point, with the intention of
getting a break on that one point. It usually worked. Against the consistent
offenses in the elite game, defensive breaks are enormously important. One
break can be the difference between a win and a loss, and a huge momentum
swing. By targeting particular points for breaks, Furious George was able to
maintain a high level of play throughout games and tournaments, but bring it
up one big step when it counted the most.
