+++
issue = "005"
title = "Anticipating The Throw"
author = "Nancy Sun"
date = "2008-07-01"
+++

One of the attributes of teams that do well at Nationals and other high-level
tournaments is their handler defense. Many teams can do a pretty good job at
containing handlers (e.g. getting the mark on to stop upfield break throws,
adjusting to stop give-go's, preventing up-the-line cuts). However, I think
there are only a few teams that have the personnel and strategy to
consistently pressure and generate D's on handler resetsâ€”this includes
pressure on both the thrower who may or may not be a handler, and on the
actual handler who makes the reset.  
  
I think that knowing which of these buckets your opponent falls into is
important to include in any pre-game scouting report. Especially if your team
is coming off of a game where handler resets were easy, it is easy for
offenses to get too comfortable, so knowing beforehand allows the team to do
some pre-game prep. Some useful drills to do are ones that emphasize decisive
handler motion and on throwing against tough marks.  
  
From a team strategy perspective, there are a few adjustments I would make
once the game gets going and it is clear that reset cuts are getting heavy
pressure. The first is to calmly acknowledge that it is a little more
difficult to complete reset passes, and that we can make it much easier for
ourselves if we focus on three things:  
  
**1.** As a thrower, look a little bit earlier. Give yourself more time so
that things are less rushed.  
  
**2.** Assuming that as a team you are already used to doing this, remind the
thrower to fake and pivot. This makes the offense less easy to predict.  
  
**3.** If you are responsible for making the reset cut, focus on anticipating
the throw coming. It may have been easy in the last game to just wait until
the thrower looked at you before moving, but now you have to take more
initiative. Take a look upfield to see what the thrower sees and check in with
your internal stall count. You know your teammates, so keep an eye out for
signs that they are about to turn to you. That tenth of a second you gain by
anticipating will go a long way.  
  
From a individual perspective, one of the things I really like to think about
as a handler against teams with tough handler defense is "winning with your
legs, not your throws". This reminds me to focus on being aggressive with my
legs to drive my defender so that I can put myself in good positions to make
easy throws.
