+++
issue = "005"
title = "Kinetic & Potential Energy"
author = "Ryan Morgan"
date = "2008-07-01"
+++

I believe that good chemistry between handlers can affect the game more than
at any other position. Having two or three experienced handlers that really
know each other is such an advantage because they likely have withstood
defensive pressure like this before and they likely have talked about it and
figured out, between them, how to deal with it. Because they can predict what
the other is going to do, they don't panic when the stall count gets higher
and they can reset the disc accordingly.  
  
The next best thing to good chemistry is having a dump system and running it
continuously at practice. Drilling over and over at practice simulates
chemistry by making cuts and throws predictable. When the pressure mounts and
novel situations present themselves, like the unusually stifling defense here,
handlers can rely on the cuts they know are coming. It sounds so simple, but
on the fields it's a very difficult thing to do.  
  
In my experience, when handlers run into trouble moving the disc it is because
the dump system and chemistry induce different results. The system might tell
you "cut upfield" whereas chemistry tells you "cut downfield." It seems like
the turnover that happened in this situation resulted from this type of
miscommunication. Since that is the only turnover between the handlers so far
I would pull them aside to make sure they get back on the same page. Handlers
deserve a lot of discretion to decide how to make adjustments to particular
situations like this one. They often see important things that other players
don't and should be free to take advantage of what they see. However, its
important to keep a close eye on them, as system-wide or personnel adjustments
may be necessary.  
  
At the college level, where a couple of main handlers will play a large
portion of the points, you have to consider fatigue from playing against such
tight defense when deciding whether to make a halftime adjustment. You will
need these handlers to play well at the end of games. To keep them from
getting gassed, adjustments can be made to the dump system to minimize
cutting. For example, the dump could focus on finding a good position early in
the stall count so when the thrower turns to dump he is already in position.
Then the dump can stand still and let the thrower initiate his cut by throwing
the disc to space to one side. This way the handler-dump only has to make one
cut to get the reset.
