+++
issue = "005"
title = "Movement, Movement, Movement"
author = "Chris Talarico"
date = "2008-07-01"
+++

The best way to attack a team that is playing good shut-down defense is to
keep the disc moving, and moving quickly. This is not a novel concept by any
means, but it's rare that a team actually hits the first open pass
consistently. Throwers tend to get antsy if you're not gaining yardage and
instead of looking to get rid of the frisbee, will instead hold it looking for
something upfiled. Every defense loves to play against a team that holds the
disc. It allows the mark to be more aggressive, and lets the downfield
defenders lock down on their men (because they know where the disc will be
coming from when a throw goes up).  
  
So the basic strategy is to hit the first open pass you see. If you're not
used to playing this way it can be quite an adjustment&you're not looking for
the ideal pass, but you're making the first high percentage pass no matter
where it is. It may seem like you're moving the disc just for the sake of
moving it, and you're really not getting anywhere. In fact, that may well be
the case for the first number of passes of a point. The key is to generate
movement from the handlers and cutters, and to bounce the disc around as
quickly as possible without being frantic. Throw and go. If there's not an
obvious open cut when you receive a pass, pitch it right back to the thrower
and cut again.  
  
Moving the disc starts with the handlers—they need to get the ball rolling,
and the downfield cutters fill in the gaps when they see a swing pass go up,
or when a handler gets an up-line pass.  
  
It's all about movement—with the disc and with cuts. Don't hold the disc as a
thrower, and don't stand around as a handler. The one caution is to make sure
you don't rush your throws&catch the disc, find the open man, make a good
throw, then get going again. The last thing you want to do is turf a 5 yard
pass because you rushed it, or drop an easy pass because you were focused on
the next pass instead of making sure of the catch.
