+++
issue = "028"
title = "Chain's Big Assist From The Weather"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2010-04-08"
+++

After twelve straight years as a nationals participant in the Open division
(1997-2008), in 2009 as a masters player was a different experience. First,
few people, and really nobody outside the division itself, care much about the
Masters division. That's not to say it isn't competitive, or even that there
isn't good Ultimate being played there, it's just that when you have the Open
nationals to watch, why would you watch Masters? So even I couldn't focus much
on the Masters division, and spent as much time as possible catching the Open
games.  
  
If there's one thing I've learned from playing on Sunday in Sarasota (and once
in San Diego), it's that few people outside the team can get an accurate read
on what is going on inside the team.  
  
Outsiders to Jam's success would say it was a bunch of veteran players who
were able to put it together at the right time. While that wouldn't be
entirely wrong, I would say there was also a subtle defensive adjustment, a
return of our leader and arguably best player who had missed parts of the
season (including Regionals), and a new found resolve that hardened the
questionably soft Jam.  
  
The Condors had great players who had spent years playing together at the top
levels, paying their dues, and knew how to rise up when the pressure was
toughest. While outsiders saw a great huck game, or individual excellence, the
team always believed in a system that put people in a position to do their
jobs; a system that was built on at least half a decade of experience and
tweaks together.  
  
Anyhow, one element that can undermine, or enhance, a team's chances in
Sarasota is the weather. This year was no different. The heat was the worst I
can recall, and I heard that the first day saw the largest single-day
consumption of water at nationals. Yes, everyone is playing in the same
weather, but the teams that play in that weather consistently have developed
strategies to minimize the effects. These teams are most effective at ignoring
the impacts that weather has on their body and mind. In addition to the heat
and humidity, there was a near-total absence of wind. This certainly helped
Chain's successful deep game. While I heard that their underneath game was
equally effective, I'm sure it would have taken a few turnovers to realize
that the wind was affecting their hucks and those few possessions could have
changed the complexion of the game.  
  
From what I saw, Chain played an outstanding game with strong offense and
hard-nosed defense. This is very similar to the game they've brought to
Florida the last few years when they've come up a bit short. Were they an
improved team this year? I don't doubt it. Did they have a great season, and
impressive run at nationals? Absolutely. Did they get an assist from the
weather? It's the same answer I would give for my championships...it didn't
hurt. Chain would have had a great chance of winning in any weather, but the
weather they got gave them a boost. I'm sure the other semifinalists would
have preferred cold (Boston), wet (Seattle) or brisk (Revolver) conditions.
