+++
issue = "028"
title = "It's Teens Again"
author = "Lou Burruss"
date = "2010-04-08"
+++

I wasn't there, but as I was watching the live feed of Fury dismantling Brute
Squad I was struck by a sense of déjà vu; I felt like I was watching Godiva.
I'm not talking about Fury and Godiva's dominance, I'm talking about a single
little cut that is the backbone of both team's offenses. It's a cut I haven't
seen other teams (men's or women's) use. I remember watching Teens (Christine
Dunlap) wreck people with this cut, getting wide open again and again and
again, so it was a little weird to watch Fury doing the same thing.  
  
The cut begins as a short in-cut from the middle of the field. (The set up
differs a bit in Godiva's vert and Fury's ho.) The in-cut is angled just
slightly to the inside-out lane. Then, at a point maybe eight yards off the
disc, the cutter plants and goes almost horizontally to the open side. Wide
open. Pretty typically, this cut is coming around 4-6 in the stall count,
providing a nice secondary option up field before looking at the dump.  
  
This cut raises so many questions for me. I used to think it was effective
only because of the physical differences between the men's and women's game. I
can't imagine trying to make that cut on a Furious or Ring defender — they'd
flatten you as you tried to come back across to the open side. The Condors ran
a J-cut for years, but theirs was much longer and was designed to test the
defenders determination. If you just gutted it out, you could shut it down.
But if the effectiveness is because of the differences between men's and
women's why aren't more teams using this cut? Is it athleticism? Then why
hasn't Riot used it? Is it system? Why hasn't anyone copied it? Is it talent?
Everyone has players talented enough to make the cut and the throw is easy,
it's a 10 yard open side swing pass.  
  
After talking to Tully Beatty, Matty Tsang, and watching the video I think I
have the answers I need about Fury, but not about Godiva.
