+++
issue = "024"
title = "A Tennis Analogy"
author = "Brett Matzuka"
date = "2009-09-30"
+++

I usually try to write on the presented topic from a objective and scientific
viewpoint, however, due to the nature of this topic, this will be rather
subjective and opinionated. Also, much of this is a comparison to tennis since
that is where I have participated in the highest levels of competition prior
to frisbee.  
  
Growing up learning the sport of Ultimate in Australia, my viewpoint of SOTG
comes from a more global perspective of competition. Now playing for Ring of
Fire, I feel I have witnessed a large spectrum of viewpoints on the topic of
SOTG, from nonexistent and unnecessary to dressing up to the theme of the
team, uncontesting any questionable calls, and giving out gifts at the end of
the game.  
  
For me, personally, I find that Ultimate and tennis share a lot of the same
competitive features. SOTG really just refers to competing at the highest
level presented while still retaining the utmost respect for the competition.
How you define retaining respect is now the key feature and how that is
displayed is at the crux of the issue. In tennis, even at the highest levels
(pre-professional), you make your own line calls. Whether in a heated battle
for break point in a match to make the final, or blowing some chump off the
court, 99% of the tennis matches I was a part of consisted of the players
doing their best to make the right call at every opportunity, whether or not
it cost them the match. From Hawaii to Australia, this phenomena is consistent
in every tennis match I participated in. It is true that 1% (1 match in every
100) of the time there was a match where this was not the case and the
opponent tried to take advantage to obtain a victory, but people are human and
this trait will appear (see below), so moving on.  
  
I found the reason that this high level of respect and sportsmanship was
consistent in tennis is because each match, not just was your game on display,
but your character, valor, and nobility as a person was on display. It seems
to be understood amongst tennis players that it is better to challenge
yourself to become a better player and improve every shot, than to make a bad
call at the expense of the opposition just to win a single point. It may not
be due necessarily to respect for the opposition as much as a desire to become
the best you personally can be, and a respect for the sport, a game based upon
a struggle with oneself mentally and physically to overcome all adversities.
However, because all players seem to take this to heart, a respect for the
opposition is inherent since each player knows that the other player is also
challenging themself to be the best they can be in the face of every
adversity.  
  
This respect can be seen even at the professional level of tennis when a
player claps when his opposition betters him on the field of battle, or when a
player wins on a technicality (let court) and holds his hand up
apologetically. This is the heart of SOTG; it isn't about goofing around or
giving your opposition the edge every opportunity, or so on, but about
respecting those that share the field of battle with you and displaying it
appropriately. Making the right calls no matter the circumstance,
congratulating someone on a great play whether they bested you or not, playing
at your highest level even if you are bageling a team, these are ways of
showing respect, and inherently, SOTG.  
  
I find that this is the world view on how SOTG is perceived. For example, at
the World Ultimate and Guts Championships in even the tightest, most
significant games, teams came together afterwards in a circle to show
appreciation for the fight that each team put forth.  
  
I think this is consistent with the top teams and lowest level teams in the
US; they would rather expect more from themselves, improve their personal
games and win on their own accord, than take advantage and obtain victory
through false means. For example, at ECC, when Ring was playing Furious in the
game to 5, Andrew Lugsdin gave up his bobbled catch in the end zone when we
called it down and a player on the sideline with the best view also called it
down. He easily could have sent it back or even argued it up, but he respected
us, the sport, and himself enough to expect more from himself and his team
than take advantage of the situation. This, to an extent, is what makes the
top teams the elite teams, they don't make excuses but expect the best from
themselves.  
  
It is true, there are still a few guys on each elite team that abuse SOTG and
show no respect to the opposition (much like that 1% of tennis matches),
however, they are usually the minority in the elite ranks in the US. For
example, playing Boston at ECC, there was a foul call on a catch and it was
contested and sent back, a single Boston player on the sideline started to
yell, swear, and berate our player for the call, though all the players on the
field, and the sideline, had already respected the outcome and accepted it.
This sort of outburst never resorts in any benefit for either team (can you
remember a time your teammates verbally assaulted another team and the call
and game went smoother?), but can find one player of this sort on each team.
However, as stated, this is the minority on the elite teams.  
  
Much like the elite teams, the low level teams also exhibit a high level of
SOTG. This again is due to their focus upon improving themselves than worrying
about a questionable call. The one place where SOTG seems to lack in the US is
in the second tier teams. The teams that feel they deserve some recognition
and praise for their work, that are always a few spots from making nationals.
I find that they take a call as a personal gesture of disrespect and an insult
directed at their game. They are the ones that have lost perspective about why
they play the game; they don't expect the best of themselves, but find excuses
why someone got the better of them. A call cost them the game, or their pride
gets in their way, they no longer play with the expectation of perfection from
themselves, but have deluded themselves into believing that they have worked
as hard as they can and no one deserves to ever beat them. This is where SOTG
fails to be present because these players have already entered the game
without respect for the opposition. They believe victory is all that matters
and that they deserve it irregardless of play. This is where SOTG falls short.  
  
With regards to how teams I have been a part of dealt with Spirit, the younger
players would always refer to the respected players on anything questionable.
