+++
issue = "024"
title = "Codifying Spirit"
author = "Ted Munter"
date = "2009-09-30"
+++

This topic is not useless, but I find that my thoughts on it are fairly
disconnected.  
  
A phrase that reminds us to respect each other and the game makes sense even
if it is not as effective as some would like preventing players from cheating
or acting like jerks. We are really just codifying the idea that Ultimate
players should practice good sportsmanship, That has value, I hope.  
  
A lot of people discover Ultimate after some bad experience with another
sport. Turned off by the win at all costs attitude of little league or youth
soccer they find the culture of Ultimate inviting. To some degree Spirit of
the Game helps us maintain that valuable difference, even if those who battle
for a national championship only think of spirt as a kind of anachronism.  
  
But as much as possible I hope the top teams try to invest a little
preparation time into playing with good spirit.  
  
For the record, the team I help coach, Ironside, sets as one of our main goals
to be considered a fair team, a team our opponents want to play. Honestly, I
don't know how we are doing. The scoreboard supplies a clear metric of whether
or not we win a game. How we are doing in terms of earning the respect of
other teams is harder to tell. No doubt we have made some dubious calls. This
year and last we have had a few tiff's against various rivals. Our fault?
Theirs? Depends on who you ask. No matter, I assume it is on us to do better
and have tried to make myself more accountable for this to the leadership of
other teams. Not easy though. What happens on the field should (I think) be
the player's responsibility and, like everyone else, I often see with biased
eyes. When I hear my players say something incendiary I get on them right away
but every once and a while its me saying "are you serious" with that call. We
all have to police each other in this respect.  
  
(I am a big fan of the Farriker award, but not sure what team spirit ratings
do. Maybe Farriker award nominees should have to put in the spirit score for
their own team?)  
  
It's worth remembering that there is a difference between cheating and not
knowing.  
  
We all put a ton of time, effort, and money into what we do and all that makes
the dragging toe or little bump that would never get noticed in summer league
seem huge in late October. We all want shape the reality in our favor. Of
late, I think top club teams have come to recognize this and are ever more
comfortable just going to the observer. That we are getting more and more
qualified observers helps, obviously.  
  
You may not know John Bar or Stu, but there was a time when everyone in
Ultimate knew those guys. They went to every tournament and the sport was
small enough for such guys to be at every party. (Is there a spot in the hall
for them?) It was one of them who said that the arguments in an Ultimate game
were not what kept us from getting on T.V. In fact, if we want higher ratings,
what we should do is get a microphone and camera in on the arguments. Fans
would love that. And unfortunately, that's probably correct.  
  
Last note, from the showcase game at ECC. Ben Wiggins burns his defender (a
former teammate, Seth Crockford) up the line. As he does so, he says something
excitedly to the effect of "I got you, Seth". But as Ben catches and throws,
Seth has not slowed down, never thought about marking Ben. He just runs after
the throw itself, which he blocks from behind. Now, I don't know if Ben and
Seth are buddies, and maybe you think what Ben said was "not spirited," but it
led to one of the best blocks I have ever seen, and no one was smiling more
after the block than Ben himself. If we are enjoying ourselves, and smiling
the way he was after that play, we are playing with spirit.
