+++
issue = "024"
title = "Even If No One Is Watching"
author = "Lindsey Hack"
date = "2009-09-30"
+++

Really, honestly, how can anyone possibly not believe that this is a worthy
philosophy to embrace? The only thing that kills me is the the name: "Spirit
of the Game." The word spirit is not synomynous with common words and
expressions I associate with sports: Grit - Battle - Fair - Integrity -
Determination - Motivation - Guts - Glory - Respect. "Spirit" is a word that I
would associate with yoga class, folklore, or a Bible Group. It is not a bad
word, just the wrong word for this particular audience.  
  
The definition of SOG plays a relatively large role for me. When I first
started playing this game, I thought it was ridiculous. I thought playing
games without officials was silly and I thought it took away from the quality
of the sport. Now, after years of careful observation and experiences as a
player, captain, coach, and administrator, I think it is what could be our
ticket to the next level. It could be our ticket to the next level because it
could be the ticket to the next level in the youth division. Youth Ultimate is
the key to the growth of our sport and if you can get that to grow, Ultimate
will grow at all levels.  
  
Spirit of the Game, and what it stands for, what it really, really means, can
be a huge selling point when presenting this sport to those you want to buy
in. It teaches kids to place respect and fairness first. It teaches them
conflict resolution. That is huge. I was blown away by the premise of Ultimate
Peace (the foundation that led the charge to teach kids in the Middle East
Ultimate frisbee in hopes to teach SotG and conflict resolution). I mean, if
we could all be a little bit better at conflict resolution, how much better of
a world would we be living in?? If you knew you would not get caught, or not
be penalized, would you still steal? Ultimate not only reveals character, but
builds it. A sport that builds character. How great is that?  
  
Therefore it means a lot to me. I am the President of the Triangle Youth
Ultimate League and the coach of the UNC-Ch Women's Ultimate frisbee team. My
character, whether playing for Backhoe or coaching, or playing at winter
league, is on display at all times and I want to represent well. I participate
in this sport on many levels and I want to do so with a sense of pride. And,
if no one is looking, I would still want to act within the definition of SotG,
because it is the right thing to do.  
  
But, that does not mean I am not human. I will make mistakes. I will lose my
cool. It isn't so much about me having these fallacies but my ability to
reflect on them and make myself a better player, a better person by learning
from my mistakes.  
  
What does it mean for my team? I would like to think that we play fair and we
play within the rules. I would like to think we respect the definition of
spirit of the game and conduct ourselves accordingly. We do not condone
taunting, we do not condone bad calls. We will tell a player on our team to
shut it if necessary. We will tell a player on our team that they were out, or
it was down, or it was a foul, or it was not a foul - even it does not have
our best interests in mind (best interests = winning). Why? Because we want to
win a game outright because we were the better team within the rules of the
game. We won (or lost) fair and square. No excuses.  
  
Why would you want to win any other way besides playing completely within the
rules of the game? And, win with grace, respect, and honor? So, you win a big
game and act like an ass to the other team. Do you really feel good about
yourself? Win with grace. Win with honor. Even if the opponent was a jerk to
you. The Golden Rule": Treat others as you would like to be treated. How can
you possibly argue against that philosophy? The challenge is to do that when
the other person is treating you really badly or cheating you.  
  
How do you prepare for an opponent that might not make calls in good faith?
Ask for observers. Forewarn them of the behavior. Go get observers. Keep your
cool. Never, ever lower yourself to their level. Play with integrity.  
  
A teammate that may do the same: First of all , an apology can go a long way.
Even if it is after the game. Even if it is not from that player, but just
from you on behalf of your team. Second of all, control your teammates. Stand
up for something that is bigger than any individual on your team, including
yourself. Do it because it is the right thing to do. Even if no one is
watching.
