+++
issue = "024"
title = "The Blender"
author = "Charlie Reznikoff"
date = "2009-09-30"
+++

What if the Minnesota Timerwolves had to play Macalaster College and a YWCA
pick-up team on their road to an NBA Championship? What if the Commissioner of
MLB also governed little league and summer softball league? Those levels of
play differ so much they are hardly the same sport. Yet in the Club Series of
Ultimate, players from all levels comingle on the same field. The best players
in the world compete against absolute novices. It is all governed by a single
organization, and usually only a skeleton crew of volunteers oversees the
proceedings. This creates community and growth, but also creates tension. We
use the term "Spirit" to negotiate the tensions that result.  
  
Most disputes over Spirit are not about cheating. Overt, systematic cheating
is so uncommon that it is shocking when it happens. Most games don't need
observers. Most Spirit debates involve different cultures of play mixing in
the tournament setting. Some people play Ultimate primarily for the
camaraderie; others would switch teams in a flash if they thought it would get
them more wins. To each the other seems to have no clue what Spirit means.
Some teams uphold meticulous pivot foot standards and blow off incidental
contact; other teams pay no attention to travels but expect a truly noncontact
game. These teams seem to have no respect for each other's Spirit. College
teams often bring a level of sideline psyche that feels taunting and
aggressive towards their opponents, but is part of high level college
gamesmanship. When a high school team brings that energy it seems unspirited
and cruel.  
  
Juniors, College, Club, Masters, Mixed, Open, Women's. Each level involves
players with different physical and emotional maturity, different experience
levels, different life circumstances, and different reasons for playing. Put
them all in a blender called the UPA and hit puree. Sometimes ugly, sometimes
frustrating, the tension that results is discussed using the language of
Spirit.
