+++
issue = "024"
title = "What Goes Through Your Head"
author = "Ben van Heuvelen"
date = "2009-09-30"
+++

Last year at Northeast Regionals my team (PoNY) was playing Bodhi to go to
Nationals. Game tied at 12s, time cap approaching, PoNY is on defense. Bodhi
goes on a fast break with a quick succession of give-go throws—"Pick!" someone
yells—and the last throw, a huck, falls incomplete. The two teams start to
argue. Was the pick two throws ago, or one? Does the disc go back to Bodhi, or
is it a turnover? The outcome of the game might turn on this call. The teams
immediately appeal to the observer, who rules that the pick was two throws
ago: Bodhi's disc. Then Russell Wallack, one of Bodhi's handlers, jogs over
and enters the discussion. "I was right behind the play and saw the whole
thing. The pick happened on the last throw. It's PoNY's disc." The observer
had just ruled in his team's favor, but Russell effectively overturns the
call. His teammates look at him in disbelief as PoNY takes possession. Then
they get a D and earn their goal.  
  
Players like Russell have taught me that, all other definitions aside, the
Spirit of the Game means two things: self-respect and mental toughness.  
  
The best players treat competition as an opportunity for them to measure their
greatness. Imagine a set of scales: you and your team are on one end, your
opponents on the other. The fulcrum is made of the rules of the game. If you
break the rules, you unbalance the scales and lose the accuracy of the
measurement. If you belittle your opponents, you lose your counterweight, and
diminish the meaning of any success you might have. (Your win doesn't mean
very much if "they suck.") In order to evaluate yourself and your team
honestly—that is, to have self-respect—you have to treat your opponents and
the rules with respect, and even gratitude. Without them, you can't measure
your greatness.  
  
I don't know if this thought, or anything like it, was going through Russell's
head when he reversed that observer's call. But I can tell you that Russell is
one of the most consistent and mentally tough players I've encountered—and I'm
convinced sportsmanship is a big piece of his success. Speaking from my own
experience, I've always played my best when my concern for winning has
evaporated in the heat of my competitive effort. We all care about the result
of the game, but if I let myself focus on who's going to score more points, or
how I'm going to look on UltiVillage, or how big a jerk my opponent is and how
much he deserves to lose, I'm just distracting myself from the next cut, the
next throw, the next D. If, on the other hand, I give all of my energy to the
intensity of my effort, I'm a better player. The less I focus on winning, the
better my chances of winning are.  
  
Such an attitude also improves the way I respond to adversity. If I think of
my opponent as an opportunity to test my greatness, then the better he plays,
the more psyched I get. His great play is nothing but a challenge for me to
push my game higher. If, on the other hand, all I want out of competition is a
"W" on the board, then my opponent's sweet layout grab feels like terrible
misfortune. Did you see the look on Kurt Warner's face when the Steelers
scored their go-ahead touchdown in last year's Superbowl? There was more than
a minute left on the clock, but you knew the game was over. Poor Kurt would
have preferred the Steelers hand him the game than really make him earn it.  
  
I could read that look on Kurt Warner's face because I've worn that look, too.
I fail the sportsman's test all the time. It's usually the inspiration of
other players—the example of opponents like Russell; the example I want to set
for my teammates—that helps me achieve greatness, if I do.  
  
One of my prouder moments on an ultimate field happened early last season.
Ironside is coming down on the pull, with Colin Mahoney sprinting down to
cover me. The disc swings from the catch to the hitch, and I jog a lazy cut
out into the lane. The throw goes up, and my hands are almost closed on it,
when Colin dives and yanks it away. I call "Strip!" Colin pounds the ground,
jumps up—he's about to scream, eyes bugging out of his head, mouth open in
disbelief. He knows he just got a D. He takes a breath. "BVH, I got that." I
take a breath. "Really?" Colin points to the disc, which is in his hand, not
mine.  
  
I'm still not 100% sure what the right call was, but here was my thought
process:  
  
**0 seconds after the play:** "Definitely a strip. I'm a beast of a receiver.
I never get D'ed. Only possible explanation for me not catching a disc is a
foul or a strip."  
  
**5 seconds:** "Colin's a pretty honest guy. He looks really convinced. Is it
possible his hand was on the disc first? Is it possible I didn't stop the
rotation?"  
  
**10 seconds:** "That play shouldn't have been close. If I bail out my half-
assed effort now with an iffy call, then I'm letting myself develop bad
habits."  
  
**15 seconds:** "But don't I owe it to my teammates to uphold my call if
there's any chance it was a strip?"  
  
**20 seconds:** "People make bad calls when they're afraid, good calls when
they're confident. What message do I want to send my team?"  
  
"Ok, Colin. I trust you. No strip."  
  
Two months later, we were playing again, and this time I got a layout D on
Colin. Colin calls "Strip!" I say, "Really?" Pause. "Ok, BVH. No strip."
