+++
issue = "006"
title = "Balance & Explosiveness"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2008-07-29"
+++

I still remember being at Worlds in 1999 in Scotland and it was sort of the
debut of Fortunat Mueller with Boston. He was a young workhorse at that time
and DoG knew how to use him, as he was probably catching half their goals. I
remember watching a pool play game of theirs and a more experienced player
pointing out his footwork, how he was always on balance. While we had begun
some very basic footwork drills, it was the first time I remember noticing
someone's footwork in a game situation. Footwork became a critical component
of our training after that as its value became more clear, and it's an easy
thing to work on and improve.  
  
Good footwork not only helps you stay on balance and and allows you to change
directions easily, it also allows you to be more explosive because your feet
are in the right positions to make explosive moves. The key is to practice it
so that in games you are doing the right things without thinking about it.  
  
Practicing good footwork can come in a variety of ways. Obvious things are
ladders and hurdles, which will improve your footspeed. Simple cone patterns
of direction changing, or even having reaction direction changing can
reinforce footwork in a change of direction situation. Weight distribution is
also important, and to this end getting a player off-balance or extended and
having them find their balance point is helpful. Then there are more extreme
things like one of my teammates (Chris Frost) who goes for runs in dry
creekbeds to work on his foot placement and strengthening his ankles.
