+++
issue = "006"
title = "Get On The Ladder!"
author = "Chris Talarico"
date = "2008-07-29"
+++

A big part of footwork is quickness, and the best tool I know of to improve
quickness is a speed ladder. I would highly recommend getting oneâ€”the longer
the better. The various drills and exercises are pretty easy to find and
learn, and they're pretty fun to do.  
  
You can just Google "[speed ladder
drills](http://www.google.com/search?q=speed+ladder+drills)" and you'll get
plenty of sites that do a far better job of explaining the drills than I can.
Then get your team on it: warm up, stretch, then run through the exercises at
the beginning of practice or workouts. I'm no fitness expert, but I've heard
it's better to work on speed and quickness at the beginning of a work out as
opposed to the end when you're tired and less likely to use proper form.
Whether that's entirely true or not, I'll leave for you to decide.  
  
Anyway, you can get by with one ladder for your team, though I prefer not to
run more than 10 people on a ladder just to keep the down time to a minimum,
so two usually works better when you've got your whole team together. I
guarantee you'll see results. (Note: Results not guaranteed in any real or
meaningful way).  
  
As for individual footwork "moves," one that can help make cuts sharper is
planting off your inside foot instead of your outside foot (or a cross-over
step). For example, say you're setting up a cut to the left by heading to your
right. When you're ready to change direction, the typical move is to jab your
right foot out to plant and push off to the left. Try this instead: place your
last step with your left foot under your center of gravity, or more to the
right of where it would land if you were running straight ahead. Rotate your
hips hard to the left, and swing your right leg around to make your next step
roughly 90 degrees from your original path. It will also help to get low and
dip your left shoulder as you make the move. You should see that this will
allow you to change direction quicker than with a jab step.
