+++
issue = "006"
title = "Improving Footwork"
author = "Ryan Morgan"
date = "2008-07-29"
+++

Improving footwork is just one of many ways to improve quickness and
efficiency on offense and defense. Other ways to improve quickness and
efficiency include weight training, plyos to train muscles often
overlooked/underused, learning to lower your center of gravity, core
strengthening, and balance. As a team, Truck Stop has chosen to focuses on
some of these other factors to improve quickness and efficiency.  
  
However, there are two instances where I think a focus on footwork, more so
than the other factors, can vastly improve performance:  
  
**1.** 180 degree changes in direction when cutting/defending, and; **2.**
Pivoting as the thrower.  
  
A player with poor footwork in these instances will require more steps than a
player with good footwork, making him or her slower and less efficient.  
  
Good 180 degree direction changes—going full speed one direction, slowing,
planting, and accelerating to full speed in the opposite direction—can allow a
cutter to create separation from a defender. Conversely, it can allow a
defender to keep that from happening. I see many players taking lots of little
steps to make a 180 degree turn, which inevitably makes the cuts less sharp
and more round. This is slow and inefficient. Playing soccer in HS, I was
taught the efficient way to make the turn was all based on footwork and that
it should take only two steps to get fully turned around. Let's say you are
planting and making a turn to your right, here is what I was told to do:  
  
**1.** Plant left foot pointing at or near 90 degrees from your initial
direction of motion and begin pushing off. **2.** Lift right leg, rotate hips
to the right. **3.** Point your right knee and foot in the opposite direction,
180 degrees from your initial direction of motion, no less. Plant and push
off. **4.** Drive your left arm and leg in the opposite direction to
accelerate.  
  
Focusing on the footwork during this turn will direct all of your energy in
the direction you want to go instead of wasting it with extra steps in the
wrong direction. I remember it becoming second nature fairly quickly.  
  
As a thrower, opening up space with fakes takes more than good footwork. But
sometimes all you need to get a throw around a marker is to be quicker than
him/her. Even if your fakes aren't good, focusing on footwork can give you
that quickness edge to get you from open-side to break-side faster than the
marker.  
  
As a marker, you should learn to recognize poor footwork and bait it. In my
experience, it's the taller, lankier players and, of course, the newer
players, who require extra steps. As a marker you should note poor footwork
and anticipate the same footwork next time. Then, if you have good footwork,
you should be able to beat the thrower to the release point to get the block.  
  
I do not have great fakes and am often criticized for not pivoting enough when
I have the disc. Last season I came up with a little drill to do at home to
improve quickness. It's supposed to simulate throwing around a marker. I moved
away the chairs to make some space in front of my kitchen table, which is
about 5 feet long. Then I positioned myself in middle of the long side of the
table with a disc. Focusing on quickly moving my non-pivot foot in only one
step, I would fake one direction, pivot, plant, and pretend to throw by
touching the short side of the table with the disc during the throwing motion.
The length of the table and the need to touch the short side of the table
forced me to extend out. I would repeat the drill until I felt comfortable
with my footwork. Then I would do it again, positioning myself relative to the
table to simulate a forehand mark, backhand mark then straight up mark.  
  
I further refined this learned footwork in practice against live marks. Even
though my fakes are still atrocious, I now feel more confident that I can beat
a marker to my throwing release point because my footwork is cleaner.
