+++
issue = "031"
title = "Full Focus, Full Effort"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2011-02-28"
+++

When planning a practice, it is important to think about the personnel and
goals of a practice. For instance, a fall practice for a college team is going
to have very different objectives than a fall practice for an elite open team.
The college team might be trying to have a lot of fun to "set the hook" with
new players and give a lot of reps to players still learning the game, while
an elite team is tuning up for the peak of their season and should be focusing
on consistent execution of skills. Recognizing the goals of a practice is
critical in its design. This brief article will focus more on elite practices.  
  
Early in my ultimate career I was exposed to high level college and pro
football practices. One of the things that I was most surprised by was that
the players were only on the field for two hours. I was used to ultimate
practices which went no less than three hours, and I figured top athletes were
doing the same thing. However, in those two hours of a football practice there
was more attention to detail, the movements were more scripted and the overall
focus was very different than my experience with ultimate practices. In short,
football players seemed to be getting more out of a two hour practice than we
got out of three.  
  
This got me thinking more about designing practices for top-level teams.
Rather than doing a drill for a mind-numbing number of repetitions at a
continuous energy level that prevented execution at 100% speed, what if we did
two drills, but only did 6 reps of each drill, and did each rep at 100% speed
with some rest in between? The effects seemed to be very positive. The team
was much more focused, and it seemed that there were no wasted reps. Further,
the movements and timing of drills simulated actual play more closely than the
old version.  
  
Some of the things that were required in order to get this focus and buy-in to
this "new" style was a more thorough planning of the practice, development of
new, stimulating drills, and finally talking to the team at the start and
letting them know which drills would be done, when we would rest, and a
general flow of the practice. When players saw that there was a clear plan,
with a focus on particular skills, they were responsive to this change and the
overall level of intensity at practice improved.  
  
Finally, we got away from a mindset that a practice that lasted less than
three hours didn’t fully accomplish something. If the team could meet the
objectives in two-and-a-half hours, then we didn’t need to practice longer.
Incidentally, playing with full focus and full effort typically left players
feeling equally exhausted after a practice that wasn’t as long as before.
Overall, we were able to accomplish as much or more, in a shorter time, and at
a level of play and focus that stimulated what was required on the field
during competition.
