+++
issue = "031"
title = "Parts of a Whole"
author = "Shane Rubenfeld"
date = "2011-02-28"
+++

Everything that happens at practice should be a building block and not an
isolated event. You need to design practices behind a theme that's overtly
stated to the whole team and repeated often throughout the day. Never let the
participants lose track of the day's goal or remain unclear about the lesson
at hand. Emphasizing concrete points of focus over the course of practice as
well as the course of the season gives your players a measure of their
progress, in addition to game-time tools. Here are five points to consider
when drawing up and running practice:  
  
**1) When you introduce a concept, tie it to your overarching offensive or
defensive theme.** Be clear about the exact actions to be performed, and under
what conditions. Try to maintain consistency and keep clear delineation
between 'system' -- your team's rules-- and exceptions to them.  
  
**2) Avoid switching gears with no transitions.** Don't switch suddenly from
one practice point to another; if your two lessons don't relate somehow, you
can probably save one for the next practice.  
  
**3) Punish for lapses in the lesson of the day, not for every fault.** A lot
of teams run sprints or have other repercussions for turnovers, poor choices
or other screw-ups. If your team employs such a system, be judicious about
assigning them when you're stressing the lesson of the day. Sprints for drops
when you're focusing on the cutting system or on breaking the mark will
distract and waste minutes. Instead, how about sprints for the wrong cutting
and clearing, or for getting broken?  
  
**4) Scrimmage with intent.** Don't just release the hounds after the teaching
drill to go play ultimate. Mix up scrimmage rules in ways that keep the team
focused on the lesson of the day: 7v0, half-field possessions, turnover limits
with repulls, always starting the disc trapped on a sideline are all tweaks
you can work in that will keep players trying to make each other better, and
not just win an insignificant scrimmage. _SIDE NOTE: Sprints are boring. Can
you think of ways to ‘condition with intent’ in the same way?_  
  
**5) Review at end of practice.** Challenge the players to mentally go over
the lessons of the day. Again, when reviewing, place the lessons of the day
into the larger strategic concept your team is trying to adopt.
