+++
issue = "031"
title = "Take Control of Your Practice"
author = "John Korber"
date = "2011-02-28"
+++

Practice is a vital part of mastering any skill, and team sports are no
exception. A quality practice structure can transform a meaningless few hours
running around into a valuable and productive growth opportunity for your
team. While the content covered in a given practice clearly varies heavily
with the level, division, weather, time of year, etc, some of the basics of
running a quality practice are nearly always applicable. Here are a few of my
favorites.  
  
**Know your audience** – The frequency, duration, content and tone of your
practice should be specifically catered to your audience. The team’s physical
condition, level of experience, or even individual maturity can impact what
you can cover and for how long. Your group of seasoned club veterans will
probably have some patience for 15 minutes talking about the subtleties of a
zone defense; your brand new group of high school rookies probably needs a
shorter, more simple presentation.  
  
**Have a purpose for everything you do** – Demand of your players (and
yourself) that anything worth spending time on should be for a good reason.
Structure your practice with activities with particular purposes…generally the
more specific the better. Share the goal with the team and make it a clear
objective. Clearly measurable actions are often the easiest for everyone to
keep track of. For example, this year my team was struggling with moving the
disc horizontally, so we would scrimmage and limit the offense to 4 throws
without crossing the vertical midline of the field. Failure to do so resulted
in a turnover. Players on the sideline counted the throws out loud to make
everyone aware. The specific, measurable objective quickly opened up our
offense and got us comfortable moving the disc horizontally.

Success: crossed midline within 4 passes |  Turnover: failure to cross within
4 passes  
---|---  
![huddle31i
korber01](https://www.usaultimate.org/assets/1/News/huddle31i_korber01.png) |
![huddle31i
korber02](https://www.usaultimate.org/assets/1/News/huddle31i_korber02.png)  
_[Diagrams by Kathryn Irons]_  
  
**Keep things moving** – Regardless of the demographic of your team, learning
is often best facilitated with variation. Keep your drills short, 10 to 15
minutes maximum. The result of the drill is not as important as the
experience. Sometimes letting the team struggle with a new concept and work it
out is for the best. Succeed or fail, after 15 minutes most drills get stale
and it is time to move on. Take water breaks as a team between segments of
your practice, and encourage players to push through the current segment
without stepping aside for rest. It is much easier to demand a high level of
focus for short spurts than to ask your players to stay with you for hours in
a row and self-regulate their attention.  
  
**Mind your distance** – Teaching and learning is a personal exchange between
teacher and student. When it is time to teach, explain, or diagram a concept,
bring the team in close and talk so everyone can hear you. When an individual
player requires feedback (not to be confused with encouragement), have a
conversation instead of yelling across the field. When it is time to practice
what they have learned, let them play. Keep your distance and let them
experience what they need to. When it is time to teach again, reel them in for
a water break and go back to the chalkboard.  
  
**Keep up the intensity** – While walkthroughs and careful demonstrations are
an important part of teaching, learning and developing muscle memory almost
always needs to be done at game speed. Ultimate is played best in short bursts
of energy, much more like hockey shifts than a soccer game. Practice is the
time to develop comfort with the repetition of explosive output while
mastering the poise of executing fine motor skills at that level. If the
intensity in your practice exceeds the intensity of any game you play during
the season, you are preparing your team well. To allow your players to go
through the motions and use excuses like "In a game I’d layout for that," is
doing them a disservice.
