+++
issue = "031"
title = "Three Easy Targets"
author = "Ben Slade"
date = "2011-02-28"
+++

It’s the end of the day, and it feels like nothing has been accomplished.
Teammates barely listened to instruction, drills were sloppy and unfocused,
everything took twice as long as it should have, and you walk away with a sick
taste in your mouth, directing your anger and frustration towards the most
vocal trouble-makers. That’s right, you’ve just experienced another bad
practice.  
  
We’ve all had this feeling before, and while you’ll probably have it again,
there are ways we can reduce the severity of the bad practice. I think that
there are three main enemies which can subvert your practice time and cause
your players to lose focus, and they are all (partially) under your control.
These three problem areas are poorly chosen drills, lax leadership, and too
much wasted time between activities.  
  
First things first. If you are a college or youth team, odds are good that
there are not enough Frisbees in the air at practice. Many drills are ill-
suited for your needs, and they all revolve around the same theme: two (or
more) lines, one frisbee, and lots of players watching a single actor while
waiting for their turn. This is exacerbated 1) for clubs that are large or
almost big enough to split into two teams, and 2) for clubs that share
practices with their B team due to time/space considerations.  
  
Actively campaign to maximize the "touches" each player gets in a single
practice, especially early in the season. Split "line drills" in half or in
thirds to increase productivity. If the drill requires a lot of space, combine
it with one or two compact throwing/running/catching drills, and rotate
players every 15 minutes. If you have 25+ players and limited space, consider
building four or five 3 v 3 fields (30x20 w/ 5 yard endzones) perpendicular to
your field instead of a single scrimmage. Invent drills that let you move in
‘waves’ across the field, then sprint back to the beginning, so that discs are
always in the air. Split your team into thirds and have 2/3 scrimmage each
other or play endzone games while the other third runs a drill, and rotate on
the clock. Always be pushing to get more discs and people moving, and it will
translate into confidence when it matters.  
  
Regarding lax leadership: this should go without saying, but if you wait until
everybody shows up to start practice, you are doing your team a terrible
disservice. As a player, you should ask your friends to come 15 minutes early
to each practice to "help you with your throws," and, as a captain, start
running warm-ups in the first minute of your scheduled practice time. If your
leaders are late, your team will be late. Always. Elect punctual captains.
Elected captains: create a culture of earliness and refuse to start practice
late.  
  
Finally, if you want to reduce dead time in between drills, you need to always
tell your players the next thing that they will be doing. You can minimize
that awkward dead period in between drills by planning ahead and by giving a
defined break time (e.g. "90 seconds to get water, then we are doing a 3-man
breakmark drill"). Captain-coaches, this means that you have to duck out of
the present task five minutes early to set up the next drill. If you are lucky
enough to have a coach, encourage him or her to take care of it.  
  
If you can get more discs in the air, make use of your full practice time, and
always tell people where and when they are headed next (and have it ready for
them), you will be amazed at how much more productive your practices are. In
my experience, players are generally motivated to work hard, and will exhibit
good practice attitudes if you keep them busy and keep them moving.
