+++
issue = "023"
title = "Avoid The Pile-Up"
author = "Ray Illian"
date = "2009-09-23"
+++

We've all been there before. The throw goes up, the disc catches some wind,
and just hangs. As the intended offensive receiver, you are forced to slow
down and track the path of the disc. It soon becomes quite crowded around you
as multiple players converge on what seems like the optimal position to vie
for the disc. Soon it's time to jump for the disc and hope everything works
out. If you can maneuver through the tangled mess of limbs and actually extend
your arm(s) into the air unfettered and catch the disc, then pat yourself on
the back. You completed a low percentage catch, and the thrower owes you a
burrito/sandwich at the next team dinner.  
  
For the rest of us who aren't Alex Nord or Brodie Smith, our best chances of
catching the disc arise from exploiting the weaknesses of the pile-up. The
first of which is a speed mismatch. Crowds of people vying for the same
position are usually moving pretty slow. Take advantage of this and always be
moving faster than the crowd when you prepare to jump for the disc. Sprint
towards the pile, take the extra long step to lower your center of gravity
(and load your calves like a spring), and use the extra space around you to
translate your horizontal momentum into vertical momentum by propelling your
off-jumping leg and catching arm upwards in one motion. This could very well
give you the extra inch or two you need to sky the pile, as those trapped in
the pile are usually unable to jump at their maximum height.  
  
Another weakness for those in the pile-up is perspective. The farther away you
are from the crowd, the better your grasp of the situation becomes: You have a
more complete view of the path of the disc and the movement of other players
which gives you a better idea of where the disc will end up. This information
can help you take the best course of action, whether it's trying to sky the
pile, realizing the pile has the wrong read on the disc and beating them to
the right spot unobstructed, or strategically positioning yourself to pick up
the trash after a deflection (which is more likely than the disc being
caught).  
  
Truth be told, the intended receiver rarely is the one to win these 50/50 type
scenarios. Rather, it's the heads-up offensive player on the other end of the
fieldâ€”surveying the situation and acting accordingly at 100% - who is going to
come down with the disc. Avoid the pile-up.
