+++
issue = "023"
title = "Beating The Pack From Below The Canopy"
author = "Brett Matzuka"
date = "2009-09-23"
+++

Usually being the shortest guy on the teams I play on, catching 50/50 (jump
ball) discs from my perspective is a different game altogether. There are two
situations you can encounter with a 50/50 disc. Either you are in the eye of
the storm, in which case you were the initial receiver or your the first
defender to get into the play, and a multitude of others are collapsing down
upon you from all places.  
  
This case is the hard one for people of my stature as you will get caught up
in a group of people obviously taller than you. In this case, there are a few
steps you can take to maximize your chances of getting a play on the disc.  
  
The two most important parts to me can be summed up with: play smart, play
tall.  
  
Play smart just means don't try and out jump or play a game of 500 with a
group of people who already have a huge advantage in height. Instead of
attempting to sky Shaq, try and get to the position where you believe the disc
will first be playable. This is especially important as most packs of people
are rarely in the spot the disc will first be playable, but will stumble there
as the disc floats by. This is your chance to take advantage of all those
trying to battle for immediate position on one another to get a good chance to
get into position for the disc. Getting in position for the disc is defined as
getting to the point which maximizes your personal chance of making a play on
the disc, while getting position on an opponent is defined as getting in a
position to minimize your opponents chance of making a play on the disc.  
  
Defensively, this second definition is important since for someone short like
myself, you can lure your opposition out of his best position to make a play
on the disc to a less advantageous position; this may not immediately benefit
you in terms of making a play yourself, but it does cut their chances of
receiving the pass which is realistically your real objective on defense. For
our sake, we will be trying to catch the disc at all times. With that, once
you have got to a position you believe is best for you to play the disc, next
it is time to play tall.  
  
For someone like me, this means one simple thing: Go up early! Like I said
before, you are not going to sky Shaq, but you can catch him off guard before
he begins to make a play. If you go up early, not just will that give you a
better chance, but it also will increase your chances of getting fouled. A
taller guy thinks he can take another second to set up as he already has the
height advantage. By going up early, you have already established your
position in the air. If the opponent then jumps later and into you, there is a
decent chance his contact will result in a foul which results in your
possession. Since this is your overall goal, taking any advantage to
accomplish it is worthwhile.  
  
The second case that comes up is the group has already formed and you are
running in to join the pack. In this case, being my height, it isn't about
joining the giants as much as predicting the final outcome. Most likely, the
disc will get mac'd (mac = mid air correction) around, and your job is to
predict where it is to finally finish its flight. This is more advantageous
than joining the pack because 1. you will probably not be able to follow the
steps from case one which is probably your only chance of realistically having
a play, 2. because jumping from outside the pack into it almost always results
in a foul whether you accept it or not, and 3. the best outcome personally
from your position is being the scrapper.  
  
So, for this second case, instead of joining the mayhem, read the disc flight
pattern, the wind, the group and try and place yourself outside the pack in a
place the disc most likely will finish if no one explicitly catches it. This
sounds easy enough, and it is, but you will be surprised at how many times a
few players join a pack with no realistic shot at receiving the disc just to
watch as it gets mac'd to where they were before they decided to jump in. If
you watched Rhino's highlight videos from Regionals 2 years ago, they got 3-4
completions/goals by having players stand outside the pack and make plays on
the scraps after large numbers of big men mac'd it.  
  
All in all, when the disc goes up and you think you can make a play, whether
you are the intended receiver or the dump for that throw that jump went up,
put everything you can into making it a completion. Whether it is a complete
jump ball, or a one on one contest, if you play smart and play tall, you will
surely come down with more discs than before.
