+++
issue = "023"
title = "Winning On Both Sides Of The Disc"
author = "Chase Sparling-Beckley"
date = "2009-09-23"
+++

**On Offense**  
You ought to have done much of the work up front. You were out in the lane
first, making an open cut to the end zone, you were looking over your shoulder
and saw the release point of the throw. You made your read early, calculated
the trajectory of the disc, and picked your line before your defender even
heard an up call.  
  
Realizing that your thrower has laid you out to dry with a floaty throw (at
least they didn't pump fake and make you come under), you pick a spot four to
five yards from where the disc will come down between the disc and the
defender to hold your ground. You pause, as several other defenders and Danny
Trydiak pile up near you. As the disc is just about to glide into range you
attack, with two large, powerful steps towards the spot you predicted and an
inertia-aided spring from your dominant leg. You jump, and snatch the disc
right over the top of the pile of defenders. People tangle up in your wake,
Danny springs free for the end zone, and an easy throw for a goal.  
  
**On Defense**  
Your head was down, you were running hard to make up ground, when the up call
came. You immediately look up to see the disc, just a glance and a quick
read—it is floating—and then you put your head back down and try to close the
distance between you and your mark, knowing that they have already gotten a
better look at the disc. As you close in, your mark starts to slow up a
little, you glance over your shoulder again at the disc, this time able to
make a fair judgment of where it is going to come down. Your mark ought to
have picked the best spot to be in already, a few paces from the anticipated
catch zone. You quickly do the math, "Am I taller/wider than my opponent? If
so, I would get between them and the disc, forcing them to initiate contact on
their jump, and effectively using my girth/height advantage to box them off
the disc. No, I am shorter but jumpier."  
  
You pick a line similar to the offensive player, a few big steps laterally
from the anticipated catch zone, and pause as more offensive players and Danny
Trydiak pile up under the disc. At the right moment you spring, propelling
yourself towards the disc and then up—your highest jump. At the last second,
you remind yourself, "Be sure" and opt to catch the D instead of macking it.
As players tangle and fall in your wake, you swing the disc wisely to Roger,
knowing that Danny will probably just huck it....
