+++
issue = "022"
title = "\"Point Guard\" Options"
author = "Ben Wiggins"
date = "2009-07-28"
+++

When I play, I often pick up the disc after a turnover. When I coach, my teams
are in this situation often (as Lou noted, college teams have dead-disc
situations much more frequently than in club Ultimate). Given the inherent
confusion of the moment, I value a simple communication system in order to
create positive and coordinated disc movement in a chaotic environment.  
  
I really don't care if everyone on the team can call plays. How many players
are really going to be picking up the disc after a turnover anyway? 2-3 on
your team, total? 4? What I do value, however, is a system where those few
players can simply and clearly tell the rest of the team what they want to
happen. As a coach, I like to be able to call out a sequence to beat a
specific poach or matchup. I like running very few plays, but having an extra
level of communication ready to describe individual moves.  
  
One system I've used: Every player on the team is assigned a letter. Unless
they are a play-caller, they really only need to remember that single letter
(which is great for the majority of the team that is rarely going to be
encoding the information). We then use either a number or a letter for 4-5
different kinds of cuts. 1 = deep, 2 = in, 3= break, etc. This means that I
can walk to a disc, and see that the defense is planning an in-out bracket of
two cutters. If those cutters are 'R' and 'S'. I can call R2 S3, telling both
cutters to come underneath to different sides of the field. It doesn't matter
that neither cutter can see the bracket; they'll give me bracket-beating
options naturally.  
  
You can cook this system up by adding in numbers for dump-swings, give-go
moves, and continuation (for example, R2 S2 might be simultaneous cuts, but
saying ''R3 and S1'' could give me an open R cutting for a break throw and
then looking for a huck to S.  
  
When I played basketball, my team ran 6-8 plays during the course of a game.
Each play, however, gave me different options that I could use. If we had a
nice size mismatch at small forward, there was a play that (even if not the
first option) would send our SF into the post. Running a (relatively) simple
system to give your on-field 'point guards' (or at least your coach) these
kind of flexible options might be worth your time.  
  
Obviously, this is useless for pull-plays and sacrifices the timing/precision
of well-practiced set plays. I've had the privilege of playing with excellent
and intelligent defenders (two of whom are writing in this Issue) on my team
who, in scrimmages, would tear apart set plays after seeing them just a few
times. To me, the ability to react to dynamic situations with simple play-
calls is more important than a really smooth team play.
