+++
issue = "022"
title = "Selecting Plays For Your Team"
author = "Lou Burruss"
date = "2009-07-28"
+++

The trick to a good set play package is selecting the right plays for your
team. Here are some basic guidelines:  
  
**1\. Make it worth your time.** There is only so much your team can learn, so
you want to make sure you are getting the most out of what you are practicing.
If you are playing elite club ultimate, over half of your possessions are
going to be off of the pull, so learn more pull plays. If you are playing
college ultimate, only a third of your possessions are coming off the pull, so
put more energy into transition plays (dead disc plays and fast breaks.) For
example, Sockeye typically runs about 15 pull plays (40 in the play book) and
2 or 3 dead disc plays. This year, Oregon ran 3 pull plays and 2 dead disc
plays.  
  
**2\. Keep it simple.** The-best-play-of-all-time is also the simplest. Stand
five guys on one side of the field and let your best player get open on the
other. Who runs this play? Jam? Ironside? Sockeye? Carleton? Burning Skirts?
Yes, yes, yes, yes and yes. I'm not a big believer in trickery. Learn a few
simple plays, get really damn good at them and shove them down the other
team's throat.  
  
**3\. Space.** The-best-play-of-all-time is also a classic example of managing
space. Using the set circumstance of a pull, the offensive team can open up an
entire sideline and the deep space for a single cutter, making it very
difficult for the defender to cover all the options. It is also possible to
organize the players on the field to take advantage of other kinds of space.
The two commonly used formations are the German and the flat stack. I like the
German because I think it gives the main cutter some nice side-to-side space
that leads to some great downfield options. I don't like flat stack plays very
much because the lanes are too crowded and you have to move several cutters
out of the way in order to make space for the intended target. Why not just
start with them moved out of the way? Admittedly, things are a little
different at the elite level because of the sophistication of the defenders,
but the basic plan is the still to make space for a single cutter. An elite
pull play might put three guys in motion, two of whom are making space and one
of whom is the cutter using that space. I don't think this is necessary at the
college level; I have yet to see a college team consistently pull off the
three-way switch necessary to shut down a pull play.  
  
**4\. Practice.** And more practice.  
  
Good luck.
