+++
issue = "022"
title = "The Benefits Of Theft"
author = "Seth Wiggins"
date = "2009-07-28"
+++

Steal, steal, steal. If you are the smartest play to have ever played the
game, you may have reason to rely on your own originality. If not, find out
who is—be it player, team, or just a better division—and how they position
themselves to be successful. Any stoppage of play, between points, after
timeouts, after violations, will allow you to see what they want to do, given
the context on the field. Pay attention during your games. Scout opponents
during your bye round. Watch film. Stealing from others may seem unoriginal,
but ignoring available information about successful strategies makes your team
worse than what it could be. Watch and learn, but remember what you're looking
for. Effectiveness in Ultimate is the combination of strategy and athletic
ability; enough of one often makes up for a lack in the other. Unless you
realistically plan on doing the same, ignore strategy that aims to out-muscle
other teams—look for teams and plays that are successful even against superior
athletes. Then use it like you drew it up yourself.  
  
An example of a stolen play is one that comes (I believe, but who knows or
cares?) from Vancouver's Furious George. It can be run with any formation
downfield, but it starts with the disc near the middle of the field, and two
players on the sideline—one even with the disc, and one downfield. To start
the play, the cutter even with the disc makes an up-line cut towards the
middle of the field, and then goes deep. The cutter downfield near the side
line then sprints parallel with the sideline back to the disc. Thrower gets
the disc to the sideline to the downfield cutter, who then looks up to the
handler cutter either continuing his cut deep, or coming underneath.  
  
This play is currently run by most teams in the Northwest. We've all seen it
many times, but it continues to work again and again. The reason for its
continued success is what you should be looking for in a well designed set
play: Its ability to force a defense to concede what the offense wants. When
the defense knows this play is coming, it can adjust in a number of ways, but
none of them (at least that I've seen or tried) could consistently provide a
better outcome then what the offense wanted in the first place. The downfield
cutter's defender could come all the way around to stop the first cut under,
but this would give the thrower, usually the offense's best, a deep shot to a
receiver with space. Deep help could come, but would also free their cutter to
get an open look in the middle of the field. The mark could adjust to take
away the sideline, but this gives up a dangerous downfield break opportunity.
Zone defenses, full of holes themselves, lead to dangerous match-up problems
later in the point. The defense is stuck—and forced to give the offense what
it wants. Think as hard as you can how your plays can do the same—but if a
different team or opponent is doing a better job, be smart enough to recognize
as well as benefit from their work.
