+++
issue = "012"
title = "Exploiting Defensive Adjustments"
author = "Nick Handler"
date = "2008-12-01"
+++

When you transition from open field cutting to goal-line cutting, two major
things change: (1) you are no longer a deep threat, and (2) a throw that gains
only a few yards can be very advantageous. Both of these factors change how
the defense will play you. For instance, many defenders will get closer to
you, get physical, and perhaps force you away from the thrower with their body
position.  
  
There are ways to exploit these defensive adjustments as a cutter. Here are a
couple of general approaches that I use to help my team score goals in endzone
O:  
  
**1\. Spacing**  
Spacing in both the vertical and horizontal directions of the field are key as
you set up your endzone cuts. Initiating cuts with a good amount of vertical
separation from the thrower allows you to use forward momentum to put your
defender on his heels. This is often necessary when defenders are aggressively
fronting near the endzone. If you can get your defender backpedaling, you can
take advantage of the small buffer he is giving you and possibly beat him to
the open side with a good jab step or hip fake - giving your team the easiest
possible throw for a score. In terms of horizontal spacing, setting up your
cut slightly on the open side gives you and the thrower the most options -
open side, IO break, around break. If you read the defender and see that he is
very afraid of getting beat to the open side, you can exploit his positioning
by cutting back towards the break side for an easy "up-the-gut" throw. Or you
can remain stationary and let your thrower put an easy space throw to the
break side if that is one of his strengths. If your defender is overplaying
the break throw, you can still go to the open side from that position.  
  
**2\. Explosive and decisive cuts**  
Explosive and decisive cuts near the endzone will force your defender to
commit to one direction, turn his hips, and possibly overpursue, all of which
will allow you to change direction and gain separation for an easy score. In
contrast to an open field cut where you may set the cut up by getting up to
full speed in the opposite direction, effective endzone cuts only need one
hard jab step, a shoulder fake, and a quick and decisive change of direction
to create separation. Many times you won't even have the time or the space to
set up a longer cut.  
  
Miscommunication due to indecisive endzone cutting is a common cause of
redzone turnovers. As a cutter, you need to work hard to create separation for
a throw that your thrower is comfortable with, commit 100% to this cut, and
let the thrower do the rest. Be decisive and you will help cut down on many
unnecessary turnovers.  
  
**3\. Give-and-go and upline cuts**  
The deep space is almost useless in endzone O (except for a hammer look), so
attacking the endzone from behind the disc or with a give-and-go is an
effective way to score. However, this needs to be part of a larger team
strategy to avoid clogging and confusion.  
  
It doesn't need to be a secret that you are going to try to beat your defender
for the score in endzone O. In fact, indicating to the thrower and your
teammates that you are in a good position to score either verbally or with a
raised hand will allow them to give you the space and time you need to make a
goal-scoring cut. Once you have this space, you can use the tactics discussed
above to help you score the goal. Finally, quickness is one of the most
advantageous physical traits in endzone offense. Often times getting that
single step of separation is all you and the thrower will need to score. Train
to improve the quickness of your first step and you will be a much bigger
threat by the endzone.
