+++
issue = "012"
title = "What To Do When The Field Shrinks"
author = "Peri Kurshan"
date = "2008-12-01"
+++

The field shrinks when you reach the endzone.  
  
Your defender no longer has to worry about your deep cuts, and so can front
you by a larger margin. The pressure builds- a turnover here in the "red zone"
seems particularly disheartening. All of a sudden, everyone is cutting at
once, forgetting about rules and technique, just anxious to get the disc and
finish the point.  
  
However, it is precisely here in the red zone that it becomes all the more
important to remember your team's strategies and offense. Does your team like
to cut from the back of the stack in the endzone? Don't cut off other cutters
by flaring out laterally from the front. Does your team look to score from a
handler cutting up the line? Don't make a cut from the stack that leaves you
hanging out in the front corner.  
  
It's important that teams have a clear idea of how they want to score in the
endzone. For some teams, patient resetting by the handlers will allow star
cutters the time they need to set up their cuts. For other teams, the aim
might be to get the disc into the hands of their star handler in the middle of
the field, and then rely on them to break the mark to whoever is there.
Whichever the case, it's important for the cutters to know their
responsibility, the cutting patterns they should be running, and most
importantly, how they should be clearing!  
  
One way of establishing an effective cutting system in the endzone is by
having it be position-based: for example, perhaps whoever is at the back of
the stack has the priority and responsibility to cut. Everyone else knows not
to cut off the cuts coming from the back of the stack. Another way to maintain
order in what might otherwise be chaos is to have a player-based system: have
a designated scorer whose role is to make cuts in the endzone. This latter
technique has several advantages, one being that you can figure out which of
your cutters is best at getting open in tight spots (or has the best ability
to grab errant throws), and give them priority in the endzone. Another
advantage is that you can separate the roles of your cutters such that the
designated endzone scorer is not your go-to yardage cutter, and might have
fresher legs than the other cutters on the field.  
  
Whenever people are cutting in smaller spaces, errors are harder to correct
for, since the disc is in the air for less time, and there are more defenders
in the area. So it's important that your cutting technique leave you as much
ability to correct for throwing error as possible.  
  
For example, to hit a receiver cutting laterally across the front of the
endzone (i.e. when the path of the disc will be roughly perpendicular to the
path of the cutter), the thrower needs to place the disc at exactly the right
spot- too far in front of them, and the disc will be out of reach, too far
behind and the defender will snatch it up. For a receiver coming from the back
of the stack, or for a handler cutting up the line to receive a short away
pass, the path of the disc is more similar to the path of the cutter, and so
that cutter can make small adjustments of their trajectory to compensate for a
disc thrown a bit more towards one side or the other. So, once you know that
you're the cutter whose role it is to make the cut, it's important to set
yourself up in a good position, so that you can make a cut that maximizes your
ability to complete the play.  
  
Lastly, a good endzone offense probably either swings the disc back and forth
to allow cutters to time their cuts off of a swing, or works on getting the
disc into the middle of the field and then trying to keep it there. Try to
avoid having the disc stuck on the sideline for too long, as then the usable
space for your cutters is even smaller...unless your endzone strategy is to
score off of hammers to the opposite corner.
