+++
issue = "008"
title = "Anticipation & Focus"
author = "Gwen Ambler"
date = "2008-08-19"
+++

I am a firm believer that anticipation and focus are the most important
elements for successful catching. I'll leave it to others to discuss the finer
points of catching techniques.  
  
For anticipation, not only do you want to anticipate where the disc is headed,
but you have to prepare your body for an anticipated catch. Anticipating the
disc's path is basically reading the disc. You need to be able to judge
accurately how fast the disc is traveling and along what trajectory so that
you can meet it at the best point possible, which is usually the earliest
point possible.  
  
One tip that has proved invaluable time and time again for reading a high disc
is to position yourself so you can see an edge along the side of the disc. The
plane that the edge of the disc is on will determine where it lands once you
factor in how fast it's moving, so make sure you can see the line the edge
forms so you can predict where it will travel.  
  
It's important to practice reading a disc so that you know when to jump to
catch a huck at your higest point possible. Even more important (because it
applies to more catches during a game) is to practice reading the speed of low
passes so that you can change the angle of your cut while the disc is in mid-
air so you meet every pass as soon as you can. Attacking the disc by taking
the shortest path will enable you to keep your defender on your back and
shield the disc from D bids.  
  
Preparing your body for a catch is an often overlooked element of catching.
I've seen a number of players drop passes because they were concentrating so
hard on running to the disc as fast as they can (which involves pumping your
arms to your side) that they hadn't prepared their hands for a catch (which
involves your hands out in front of you) by the time they reached the disc.
You have to anticipate when and where you're going to reach the disc and
already be ready to catch the disc when that time/space arrives.  
  
This does not mean stopping to wait for the disc to get to you. Instead, it
often means propelling yourself through the air with your last step so that
you have time in the air to concentrate on the watching the disc into your
hands. I am always a fan of catching the disc with both feet off the ground,
mid-stride whenever possible. This gives your body, hands, and eyes the
appropriate time to prepare for the catch.  
  
Focus as it applies to catching is simple. Watch the disc all the way into
your hands. All the way. And never try to assess where you're going to throw
your next pass before you have the disc firmly in your hand(s).
