+++
issue = "008"
title = "Body Positioning On The Comeback Cut"
author = "Chris Talarico"
date = "2008-08-19"
+++

The best thing I ever heard of for improving your receiving skills is this
game called "catch"...  
  
There's no replacement for repetition. You just have to do it over and over
until you forget what it's like to drop a frisbee.  
  
The next step is simulating game situations. Personally, I feel like the most
valuable catch to be 100% on is the in-cut: running full speed toward a disc
coming at you. It's probably the most common play in the game, but can be an
extremely difficult catch with a defender breathing down your neck There are
two things to work on here: making the catch out in front of your chest with
arms extended, and body position to block out the defender. Oh, and also, RUN
THROUGH THE #@$*^%! DISC! Few things frustrate me more than seeing a teammate
slow down to catch a pass, only to have their defender lay out in front of
them for the block. It's absolutely inexcusable.  
  
Anyway, you can work on running through the disc and catching with arms
extended with a simple drill:  
  
Set up in one line in the middle of the field facing a thrower. First person
in line cuts out, plants, cuts in at full speed and catches a pass from the
thrower. Drills don't get more simple than that, but I like this one because
it puts the cutter on display for the rest of the team. Everyone can see him
or her, and give instant feedback, criticism, or encouragement.  
  
Body positioning is all about feel and awareness. I think most players know
the term "boxing out" from basketball and have an idea of how that applies to
Ultimate. Simply, it means putting yourself between the disc and your
opponent, thereby forcing them to go around you in order to get to the disc.
You see this a lot on floaty passes where players are jockeying for position
before the disc is low enough to jump for. What is probably less common, is
applying this same principle to chest-level passes. It's difficult to convey
without seeing it and trying it, but the idea is to:  
  
**1.** Be aware of where your defender is. (Hopefully behind you, of course,
but to your right or left).  
  
**2.** Determine as soon as possible where the pass is headed. (Again, to your
right or left).  
  
**3.** Adjust your path to the disc so that you are always between it and your
defender.  
  
This means you may not take a straight line to the point where you'll make the
catchâ€”you may veer slightly to your left (if your defender is on your left
side) and catch the disc on the right side of your body, for example. It's not
a natural thing to do, and takes a lot of work to get good at.  
  
Finally, here's a random tip that I learned my first year of playing: when
laying out for a disc, if you can get two hands on it, do so. Grab the rim on
either side of the disc. You'll never doink a pass this way.
