+++
issue = "008"
title = "Eliminate The Unforced Turnover"
author = "Mike Whitaker"
date = "2008-08-19"
+++

Catching technique and practice are often overlooked components of player
development. Catching instructions generally begin and end with a
demonstration of the pancake catch and calls to "use two hands," with players
left to their own devices to improve their catching through repetitions. As a
coach of Kali (the University of Colorado Women's team), I have developed a
more proactive approach to teaching catching.  
  
The reason for this is that drops are unforced turnovers that are preventable.
Defenses are good enough at the highest levels of the game that they will
consistently take the disc away from your offense. The difference between good
and elite teams often comes down to who makes the fewest unforced turnovers.
The corollary to that is saving turnovers, not through making the spectacular
layout catch, but by increasing the margin of error for your throwers by
consistently catching the discs that aren't quite thrown perfectly. The
combination of eliminating easy drops and making the slightly difficult catch
more often can have a huge impact on the success of your team against
similarly talented competition.  
  
Here are some drills that I use to work specifically on catching.  
  
**1.** First, I talk to my team about when to catch with the thumb up versus
thumb down when catching one handed, with the hand position switching at
approximately shoulder height.  
  
**2.** Then, I have them do a set of tens, with ten throws each of inside out
forehands, inside out backhands, outside in forehands, and outside in
backhands. Each throw must be caught one-handed with the hand on the side of
the body where the disc arrives so that receivers get used to catching one-
handed lefty and righty with discs arriving at different angles.  
  
**3.** The next step is working on catching while moving. I begin by having
the player run straight at me and I throw the disc at them with some zip to
get them used to catching a disc that has some speed on it. They can catch
with either one or two hands in this drill. Five catches each.  
  
**4.** Then they run from left to right at a 45 degree angle toward the disc
and I put the disc out in front so they have to catch it left handed. Five
catches then switch to a right to left cut with right handed catches.  
  
**5.** Finally, I have the players make a 45 degree cut from left to right
going away from the disc. I throw the disc out in front and high so they have
to make high left handed grabs. Five catches each then switch the cutting
direction to use the right hand.  
  
Try these drills with your team and note the numbers of drops (any time the
disc touches a hand and isn't caught) and then see if you can improve
throughout the course of your season.
