+++
issue = "008"
title = "Honing Your Weakness"
author = "Matt Dufort"
date = "2008-08-19"
+++

Catching the disc is all about practice. If a situation comes up in a game,
it'll be much easier if you've done it a hundred times in practice than if
it's totally foreign to you. What that means is that you need to practice
catching in game situations, not just easy, uncovered, and standing still.
Practice catching the disc out in front of you, practice catching with a
defender on your back, off-hand catches, in the wind, hammers, and so on.
Something as silly as flutterguts can be a big help when you need to catch a
bobbled or macked disc. Also, try to catch everything—on defense, tipped
discs, random discs flying by during drills—and don't give up until it hits
the ground or someone else catches it. This will hone your reactions and get
you in the habit of doing it automatically.  
  
I find it particularly beneficial to practice the things you're weakest at.
For example, I'm terrible at catching discs straight-on, where I'm running
directly at a disc that's coming straight to me. So I practice those catches
constantly, during warm-ups, down-time at practice, or when I'm throwing
around. They still give me trouble, but I'm a lot better than I would be if I
didn't work on them.  
  
Different types of catches allow for different margins of error. Clap catches
are easier than two-hand claw catches, which are easier than one-handed
catches, and so on. If you know you have tons of space from any defenders, it
makes more sense to use a clap catch This is particularly true when conditions
such as wind, rain, or bright sun make catching more difficult. Lots of drops
happen because receivers make the catch harder than it needs to be.  
  
Sarasota, Florida, where the UPA Club Championships have been held for years,
is notoriously windy. At its worst, the disc can bounce six inches up or down
in a moment. In these situations, I use what I call the "alligator catch." I
put my elbows together in front of me, with the hands spread so that my
forearms make about a 90-degree angle. This way, if the disc pops up or down
just before it gets to me, it'll hit me in the forearms, and I'll still have a
good chance of catching it. If a defender's right on my back, I won't have
that luxury. But in general, I like to use the easiest catch I can without
risking getting blocked.  
  
One last thing that's intuitive to many players, but may not be obvious to
others, is the influence of spin on catching. Especially if you're catching
with one hand, you want the disc to be spinning into your hand, not out of it.
This means if a right-handed backhand is coming straight at you, you want to
grab the disc just right of its center. The disc should "stick" to your hand;
if you try to catch the same pass left of center, the disc will feel like it's
pulling out of your hand. I find it especially helpful to focus on this with
throws where the direction of spin isn't as clear, like blades and upside-down
throws. You may already be doing this unconsciously, but being aware of it can
make difficult or awkward catches that much easier.
