+++
issue = "008"
title = "Making It Routine"
author = "Tully Beatty"
date = "2008-08-19"
+++

In the sixth grade, I played YMCA basketball and was coached by my
classmate/neighbor's father. His sadistic assistant used to routinely fire
passes at Billy Nesbitt's head because Billy had such terrible hands; his poor
hands caused his braces to cause his mouth to bleed. Sobbing, snot, and blood
are not too fun to witness when you're in sixth grade. I never wanted to be
anything like poor Billy. I think he's an orthodontist now.  
  
The one catch that I know I am going to always have to make routinely, or have
had made routinely, is the one where you're coming under and the defender is
breathing down your neck, and the throw is just a little bit too high, like an
arm length and a half too high, and you have to go up with your opposite hand
to make the grab. In practice, in various drills, I try and go opposite hand
on anything that's floaty. However, it's the ones that are down around the
laces that give me the most trouble and the types I continue to work on.  
  
I was Chris Hinkle's teammate on Ring of Fire for four seasons and what
constantly impressed me and what I continue to try and emulate was his ability
to come under at full speed and make the catch down around the laces with one
hand, usually his opposite hand, switch hands while establishing the pivot,
and be ready to deliver and get rid of the disc in what seemed like one
complete motion. Obviously it was his baseball background that made it look
effortless and easy. More often than not, I'd have to slide in to the catch,
awarded a nice strawberry on the right cheek for doing so. But if the throw
was right (wrong actually) and the separation was enough, fielding the disc
usually worked and it felt good switching hands and moving the disc before
"stalling 3" was uttered.  
  
And for my own play, for my role, the seemingly easy catches are always the
most important.
