+++
issue = "008"
title = "Practice Ideas"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2008-08-19"
+++

The fundamental catch most players at the elite level of the game is one where
you are running hard back to the disc with a defender on your back pressing
you to keep your maximum speed until after the reception. The basic component
to catching this is the mentality of attacking the disc.  
  
I have seen many players drop this by trying to finesse the Frisbee into their
hands rather than aggressively securing it, whether with a "clap catch" or a
"tiger claw" technique. A very simple drill to improve this as a team is
setting up lines where you run at throwers who try to deliver crisp passes
right at your chest. Each individual must press themselves to push all the way
through the reception, rather than slowing up at the end, allowing a block for
a defender in a game situation. If any fear of attacking the disc in this
situation can be eliminated at practice, it will certainly bode well for in-
game performance.  
  
Beyond attacking the disc there are basic hand-eye coordination elements which
will help players improve their catching. Hand-eye coordination can be
improved, and there are no shortage of ways to challenge you to get hands
reacting to what the eye sees. Some ideas for things to try when just playing
catch are always catching with one hand (i.e. 10 passes with the left, then 10
with the right) regardless of where the disc is thrown, trying to catch the
opposite side of the disc than you would normally catch (based on the spin) or
changing which hand you put on top when clap-catching. Training the body to
get outside it's comfort zone will make some difficult in-game situations more
natural.  
  
Finally, playing catching reaction games, whether with a disc or ball or
anything actually, will help the hands respond to new situations and improve
their ability to react to what the eye sees, rather than thinking through a
particular catch.
