+++
issue = "016"
title = "Depends On The Offensive System"
author = "Ben Van Heuvelen"
date = "2009-03-31"
+++

The value of the sideline space depends on the offense. In a horizontal
offense, the sideline limits your options. In a vertical offense, it's a great
place to be—until it isn't.  
  
**Horizontal**  
  
From a downfield cutter's perspective, one unique benefit of the horizontal
offense is that it lets you make cuts across the mark. With so much uncrowded
horizontal space between the cutters and the thrower, you can threaten an
open-side cut, then change direction to receive a breakmark pass. (Even a
great defender cannot take away the open side and the break side, and a good
thrower will be able to open up either the i/o or around break.) Some teams
call this a "stop cut"—a short-yardage cut across the field and back, where
the cutter often gains the disc with a 1-2 second unmarked throwing window.
It's a great way to get a horizontal offense flowing.  
  
With the disc on the sideline in a horizontal offense, however, you lose the
option of cutting across the mark. From a cutter's perspective, there are
fewer "sweet spots" on the field where a thrower can likely deliver an
accurate pass. From a defender's perspective, you have a much better idea of
where your man wants to cut. Advantage defense. This isn't to say that your
horizontal offense can't make lemonade from sideline lemons. (Indeed, any
offense will end up on the sideline, so you should learn how to make the best
of it—and I'm sure some other Huddle contributors have given good ideas to
this effect.) But, in my experience, it's easiest to deal with problems,
whenever possible, by avoiding them.  
  
I place the responsibility largely on the handlers. Good defenses will
recognize that the middle of the field is more dangerous to them, so they'll
often use a dump defender to poach the passing lane. One possible response is
for the offense to swing the disc to the poached sideline handler. A better
response, though, is to have your handlers cut towards the middle of the
field. For example, if you're being forced forehand, and your forehand-side
handler is being poached, send him on a 20-yard sprint from the sideline,
behind the thrower, to the break side: the thrower pivots to the backfield,
keeps his hips between the marker and the break side, and delivers a little
flip pass to the streaking handler, who receives the disc ahead of his
defender, open for a 1-2 second unmarked breakside throwing window. Even if
the defense recovers, you've reset the stall and maintained possession at
midfield. As a downfield cutter, I like the look of this setup much better
than a narrower sideline cutting lane.  
  
Another easy adjustment is to create terminology that emphasizes how much you
like the middle of the field. When we're running horizontal, my team calls the
middle 20 yards of the field "on stage," and the 10 yards closest to each
sideline "off stage." We want the disc on the stage. (As an aside: we also
want no more than two cutters on the stage at a time.) If the disc is off
stage, we want to get it back on stage. If you have the disc on stage, then
you can look downfield an extra second or two before you look to reset. If you
receive the disc off stage, you look flow for a second or so, then get the
disc back to the stage right away.  
  
**Vertical**  
  
In a vertical offense, the sideline is like a good party—you can have a great
time, but if you stay too long, you'll wear out your welcome.  
  
Again, I look at this from a downfield cutter's perspective. If my teammates
and I are clearing space effectively (a big "if," which even many elite teams
fail to achieve), then every downfield throw goes to a cut that originates in
the vertical center of the field. This means that the cutter can choose the
angle that will seal his defender from a play on the disc, and it means the
thrower has a high margin for error, since a cutter can change his angle to
account for an overthrow or underthrow. (If a cutter is entirely vertical to
the thrower, on the other hand, he can only account for a throwing error by
running faster or jumping higher.) As long as our cuts are originating from
the middle of the field, we're going to have good angles and high completion
percentages. If we work it up a single sideline, and every cut comes from the
vertical center of the field, then I'm happy with our offense—even if every
single pass is received within 5 yards of the same sideline. It's all about
the percentages.  
  
Vertical offenses break down when cutters don't recycle fast enough. If the
disc advances and cutters fail to push far enough downfield ahead of the disc,
then defenders can back their man, knowing that the offense won't benefit much
from a 5-yard in-cut jammed to the sideline. Similarly, if cutters fail to
recycle to the vertical midfield (i.e., if they crowd the flow-side sideline),
then their cuts (deep or underneath) will have no horizontal angle to the
thrower, and the completion percentages will fall. At this point, it's the
handlers' job to reset the offense. If you have a smart and hardworking corps
of cutters, then all the handlers need is to throw a pass or two. (Swinging
the disc to the opposite side of the field is always a good thing, but not
essential.) Mainly, the handlers are buying time, keeping the stall count
fresh, while the cutters recycle, create passing lanes, and put themselves in
position to enter the lanes on good angles. Then, whether we're attacking a
new side of the field or not, we are cutting on angles that give us high
downfield completion percentages.
