+++
issue = "016"
title = "Drilling For The Sideline Trap"
author = "Charlie Reznikoff"
date = "2009-03-31"
+++

An organized approach to sideline situations gives the offense a great
advantage. For example: a well-isolated huck down the line or a series of
swings to the breakside. Unprepared and against a good defense, a team facing
a sideline trap will likely turn the disc over. I would challenge any team to
spend more time practicing from the sideline. Most teams have only one play
for the sideline, and many for a centered disc. Most teams design their plays
to start from a stopped disc. Most teams draw up their endzone offense
assuming the disc centered, ten yards out. Most teams do not train for when
things break down. Like most teams, Sub Zero spends the majority of its energy
developing strategy for the middle of the field, for the best case scenario,
and for the O-line catching the pull, though this represents the minority of
our actual offense. Teams that use wishful thinking when designing strategy
and drilling will get forced into unplanned situations by a good defense. No
situation more exemplifies this than the sideline trap.  
  
Sub Zero ends practice with a scrimmage, O-line versus D-line. If the O-line
scores, they pull to the D-line. The D-line calls a play, receives the pull,
and centers the disc. Yet this never happens in a game. Why not instead have
the D-line set up on the sideline with the disc? Why not spend entire
practices with possessions starting randomly around the field, giving the team
only 20 seconds to set up? Or, do the same but ask your players to set up out
of position with no play call. You could practice offensive possessions with
your team setting up a play, but start with a swing to the trap and flow from
there. Your frustration in that practice will lead you to develop strategy for
those situations. I suggest that every team dedicates fifty percent of its
practice
