+++
issue = "014"
title = "\"Beating\" The Mark"
author = "Adam Sigelman"
date = "2009-03-09"
+++

When most players think about breaking the mark, they envision a thrower
throwing around or over a stationary mark. However, I'd argue that the
majority of break throws in high level ultimate don't happen this way. Most
breaks I see are simple forehands and backhands thrown in motion with the mark
trailing behind the thrower.  
  
You can be a great at switching fields with the Frisbee and have terrible
"break throws". Here are three keys. (Note that this scenario assumes the disc
towards the force sideline and you set up slightly behind or parallel to the
disc. However, these same principles can apply in other scenarios as well).  
  
**1\. Separation.** Breaking the mark starts first with your legs. It makes
your life much easier if you can get a good few yards of separation. The
typical (but not only) move is to drive your defender a few yards up the line.
Wait until she turns her hips, plant, and then go back towards the line of
scrimmage. The defender has to respect the up-the-line cut, giving you a
chance to create separation going back towards the Frisbee.  
  
**2\. Positioning.** Once you have some separation, you need to make a key
decision in a split second. It comes down to whether you want to secure the
reset or go for a break strike. Lots of factors play into this decision; the
competency of the thrower, the conditions, where the mark is standing, etc. If
you decide to secure the reset, angle your cut to make the throw easy,
regardless of how it sets up the break throw. If you like your chances on a
slightly more difficult throw to space, you want to curl your cut towards the
break side of the field. The thrower should lead you in this direction with a
somewhat floaty throw. Make sure that you put your body between the disc and
your defender. When you catch the disc, you are moving in the direction you
want to throw with the defender behind you. Getting this angle right is an art
not a science, and mastering it is key to getting this break off easily.  
  
**3\. The Release.** Don't stop. You have two and a half steps to throw the
disc without committing a travel violation. Use these steps to maintain
separation. Throw in stride. (You may need to set a very quick pivot foot to
get off a forehand, but not necessarily with a little backhand flip.) It helps
to practice catching and throwing the disc on the run, working on making your
release as quick and accurate as possible.
