+++
issue = "014"
title = "Mark Breaking"
author = "Jeff Eastham-Anderson"
date = "2009-03-09"
+++

One of my favorite fakes is really quite quick (maybe a quarter of a second of
motion), and from the waist up looks exactly like I am going to move my pivot
foot for an around break, but I immediately step out for an inside break. My
head and torso kind of lunge to one side, and I move the disc quite quickly in
the same direction, but my lower body remains stationary. Essentially, I move
just enough for the defender to commit to the big around, giving me a quick
and easy inside break.  
  
What is most important in teaching young players to break the mark?  
  
Practice. Good mechanics and confidence should be the result of endless
practice. Various studies and sources I've run across throw around some pretty
large numbers when in comes to how many times you need to repeat a task before
becoming truly proficient, and ten thousand is on the low side. If a young
player thinks they've thrown enough, they haven't.  
  
**_Which do you feel is more important: Having a lot of players that can break
the mark, or having some players on the field that can break the mark very
well?_**  
  
Both situations have their advantages, but if I had my choice I would prefer
everybody on my team be able to break the mark, as opposed to have a couple
people break the mark well. Apart from the complications the latter situation
might produce in trying to create an offensive scheme, any time you have a
predictable situation presented to the defense, if it can be stopped, it will
eventually be stopped. If every time player X gets the disc they look to break
the mark (because nobody else on the field can), the defense will eventually
key in and plug that hole.
