+++
issue = "014"
title = "Plan Ahead"
author = "Kath Ratcliff"
date = "2009-03-09"
+++

By far the most effective "move" for breaking the mark that I've found is one
that is rarely (but with increasing frequency) used in the women's game. The
general idea is that you throw a backhand over the mark's shoulder (while
being forced backhand) to the I/O lane, while using the step forward to throw
as your first step running for the give-go.  
  
Specifically, I try to throw in the space above the mark's shoulder (not too
near their face), and I throw *down*. This is important, as with most high-
release throws, if you throw in the same manner as a normal or low-release
throw, the disc will tend to sail over the receiver's head. However, if you
throw with some i/o on it, and in a downward direction, it will float enough
to give the receiver enough time to run onto it. Additionally, if you transfer
your weight from your pivot foot to your front foot (from left to right for
rightys), then you're already a step ahead of your defender, on the way to
getting the disc back. I see this type of move far more frequently in the
men's game, where the quick give-go or dish to the handler seems more common
(but it's well on its way in the women's side). One peril of this is that you
get called for a *lot* of travels, mainly because when you transfer your
weight to the front foot, even if your back foot is still down, it really
appears that you're running forward. The only solution I've come up with is to
play with observers and request for them to make a call on travel/no travel.  
  
I think the most important thing in learning to break the mark is to think
*before* you step up to the mark how you're going to break it. That is, know
what you want to throw, and figure out how you're going to make them think
you're throwing something else. The other, really most important thing, is to
be able to switch your grip from forehand to backhand with only one hand on
the frisbee (don't grab it with your off hand) extremely quickly and
naturally. If you can't move the disc to the right grip faster than your mark
can move their feet, you'll never get a throw off. (Also, markers often watch
what grip you have and cheat to that side... at least, I do.)  
  
I think it's very important to have some players who can dish out the disc to
anywhere on the field regardless of mark. But, that being said, it's very very
important for every player to be able to *at least* break a force for a dump
throw. The throw I think is the most important here is if you're trapped on
the sideline and you need to throw a dump, it's really key that everyone on
the field is able to throw around the mark to the dump in the middle of the
field. Bonus points if everyone can throw it to space, leading the dump out to
an area where they have an easy continue throw to the break side before the
mark can catch up.
