+++
issue = "014"
title = "Scoring Consistently"
author = "Chris Ashbrook"
date = "2009-03-09"
+++

What I like to do is to not let the mark dictate the throw, but for the
thrower to dictate the markers positioning and movements. In doing so, I find
teaching young players to break the mark that you must first teach them to
make themselves a threat while holding the disc. I consider the way I hold the
disc similar to what is called a triple threat in basketball. To me, this
means holding the disc in a throwing position. The throwing position that I
teach young players is:

  1. Feet placement is shoulder length apart, maybe slightly wider.
  2. Knees are bent.
  3. Balance is centered.
  4. Hold the disc with a flick grip, ready to throw.
  5. Face the mark.

  
Steps 1-3 allow the thrower to have a strong base position. This type of
positioning allows the thrower to easily step out for the forehand and to
pivot to the backhand. Many young throwers tend to be intimidated due to an
aggressive marker straddling their pivot foot; this type of throwing position
helps to reduce the amount of straddling  
  
Holding the disc in the flick grip, regardless of the force, provides the
thrower with the greatest advantage for two reasons. First, holding in the
flick position allows you to throw the flick, the hammer, scoober, and (if you
are a good enough thrower to rotate the disc into a different grip) a thumber.
Secondly, you are forcing the mark to respect the flick regardless of the
mark's force. Also, the rotation from flick to backhand is much smoother and
easier than the rotation from a backhand to a flick.  
  
As stated in step 5, I teach the thrower to face the mark. The benefits of
facing the mark are that the mark is no longer able to position closely to
your pivot foot, thereby allowing you to pivot more freely; and you force the
mark to respect the flick regardless of the force. The flick is a very quick
throw, so to break the mark you will only need to step out slightly and throw
to space.  
  
What this positioning has done is you have forced the marker to make a
decision. The marker can play you straight up, and you are able to get a quick
and easy break mark throw off. Alternatively, they can overcompensate to the
flick side which will then allow you pivot to break the mark with an easy
backhand. Many times, with an aggressive mark, you will note that they
overplay the flick position to start, and with a simple pivot they bust to
stop the backhand (which they will do aggressively as well) opening up the
easy flick break.  
  
Another reason to face the mark, the closer you are to the sideline force, the
more important it is to move the disc off the sideline, which will usually
require some type of break throw.  
  
Lastly, I try to teach throwers to recognize the angles and space to which
they are throwing. I try to have them envision themselves in a triangle with
the receiver. The third point being the space to which they are throwing. This
works best with live people, as the throwers are able to see how the angle or
place to where they are throwing the disc impacts the difficulty of the throw,
and in turn the completion percentage.  
  
A 3 or 4 person drill used to help develop the easy break throws was to set up
a 10 yds x 10 yds box. A thrower and maker would be at the bottom halfway
between the bottom left and right corners, with the receiver and defender at
the upper right corner. The marker would then mark at the appropriate 45
degree angle (flick) protecting the upper left corner. The thrower then
initiates the throw to the upper left corner (either flick or around backhand)
and the receiver trys to catch the disc within the box. Keep repeating. This
helps the thrower learn how to move the mark and where the space is for break
mark throws.
