+++
issue = "014"
title = "Utilizing Your Arsenal"
author = "Brett Matzuka"
date = "2009-03-09"
+++

Breaking the mark is key to scoring against solid defense and an important
factor to any offense. Here are 5 ways to dictate play and gain an advantage
over your mark:  
  
**1\. Expanding your options early (become more threatening)**  
  
Since at the beginning of the game the defense is trying to figure out your
strengths and weaknesses to properly apply pressure, this is your opportunity
to take advantage and become more threatening. A good defender will start with
a standard mark by trying to stop two primary breaks, the 'inside-out' and the
'around'. As play goes on, your mark learns from the options you take and
changes their mark accordingly to make it harder on you. Having the disc, and
knowing this, you have a chance to take advantage and become a bigger threat.
If you use a throw, potentially less conventional (high release flick,
scoober, push pass, etc.), you aren't as confident in early when there isn't
much pressure being applied to that throw, you condition the defender to
consider this a threat to their mark. With this, the defender will consider
this option a potential break and adapt their mark to incorporate this. This
will shift pressure off of your more confident throws, allowing you to use
them effectively later in the game.  
  
**2\. Minimize Pivots**  
  
Every time you pivot, you are changing the downfield offense's point of attack
(break side or open side), reestablishing your balance, and wasting a stall
count. An average pivot takes 1 stall count to perform, so if you pivot 3
times in one possession, you only have 1-2 stall counts to look up field
before you will need to dump. This gives little time to set up and execute a
break efficiently. By pivoting less, not just do you maintain better balance
over the possession, but you make the pivot more valuable as the defender will
not know when you're going to pivot. This can catch the defender off balance,
get them to over commit to an open side look or lure them into a false sense
of security, increasing your chances of executing a successful break.  
  
**3\. Fake only what you can throw**  
  
Good defenders are dynamic and are using every possession to get a better
understanding of what you want to throw. Your mark is using every piece of
information to hone in on what you prefer, and how to use this to generate
turnovers. Faking a throw you don't have not only wastes a stall count but
also lets the defender know their pressure is working, gives the defender
knowledge on what options you use and which you don't, and encourages them to
clamp down even more. Also, unnecessary fakes can become patterns to your
throwing routine which good defenders can also catch onto. Maintaining
composure and confidence during possession, instead of faking unnecessarily,
will keep you focused on executing your throw and keep the defender from
pinning down an optimal strategy for applying pressure to your throws.  
  
**4\. Don't force it**  
  
All of us have done the 3-man mark drill. One person throws, one person
receives and the last person puts on a hard straight up mark trying to prevent
the pass (usually starting on some high stall count). In this drill, a
defender will usually feel successful if they can manage a certain percentage
of blocks/turnovers. In turn, the defender will clamp down on the strategy
they have used that has been successful and apply more pressure and intensity,
making it hard to dictate to the mark as you would want. In a game, this is
much the same. By attempting to break unsuccessfully, your defender gains
confidence in their marking strategy, and increases intensity and pressure. If
you can manage to attempt less breaks but succeed a much higher percentage of
the time (only take the option when you are 99% confident), it forces the mark
to respect this option more by making them understand that any look to the
break side, if thrown, is going to be a success. This will keep the defender
reactive to you rather than vice versa.  
  
**5\. Make open side throws devastating**  
  
This one seems to be the most overlooked, and also most important. A good
defensive unit is going to prevent offensive flow and make your offense score
using their least favored options. For example, a good hucking offensive team
will be forced to work the disc under against a good, smart defense. This idea
is seen in tennis most often. A good tennis player will play to his opponent's
weakest shot the whole match. An opponent with an incredibly strong forehand
but average backhand will be forced to hit 85% of this shots as backhands in
order to win. Any big tennis fans will refer to Wimbledon '08 where Nadal
defeated Federer. If you look back at this match, you will notice that Nadal
played at least 80% of his shots to Federer's backhand. This was not only
because Nadal's forehand is his weapon but because Federer's least threatening
shot is his backhand.  
  
In this regard, the best way to make the break easier is to make your open
side throws seem even more threatening than your break throws. If you can
continue to deal out devastating throws on the open side, a mark will
eventually start to inch over to hinder this option in an attempt to create a
turnover opportunity. When this happens, the defender has exposed the weak
side and you should have an easy break option.
