+++
issue = "021"
title = "Defensive Handlers I Admire"
author = "Kathy Dobson"
date = "2009-07-14"
+++

Every team has its own style of play and I think it is hard to pick out
characteristics that make a great defensive handler—or any other
position—without considering it in the context of a specific team. That said,
I have noticed that good defensive lines are able to use the chaos of a turn
to their advantage. Some teams try to pick up the disc right away and move it
quickly to make it difficult for the other team to set up a defense while
others take their time to set up an organized offense. Either way, I think one
of the biggest factors of successfully scoring off a turn is the on-field
leadership skills of the defensive handlers.  
  
Nancy Sun, who was a defensive-line handler for Brute Squad for several years
and now captains Fury, stands out in my mind as one of the best on-field
handler "quarterbacks" that I've played with. Although she prefers a slower
set-up off a turn, she is able to recognize when a fast break opportunity is
available—based on how many people are downfield, their position, mismatches,
etc.—and use it to the team's advantage. It doesn't hurt that she has great
long and break throws to open up more opportunities on the field.  
  
Nurit Bloom, who played for Brute Squad for several years, is another example
of a great defensive handler. She not only creates turns with her physical and
smart defense, but she is able to move the disc quickly, making it difficult
for the opposing team to set up their defense after a turn. She doesn't have
the long throws that other handlers do, but she creates other opportunities
with her break throws and quick disc movement.  
  
Maureen McCamley, who plays for Lady Godiva, also stands out as a great
defensive handler but for a different reason. In addition to having great,
physical defense and beautiful long throws, she also has fantastic pulls. In
my opinion, any woman who can consistently put the disc in a favorable
position off the pull (back left corner of the end-zone, for example), while
playing decent defense, should earn playing time on an elite club team.
