+++
issue = "021"
title = "Handling: Vision"
author = "Deb Cussen"
date = "2009-07-14"
+++

Having great throws is one thing, but what makes a great handler is how those
throws are used. A lot of characteristics that apply can be said about any
great player, like the ability to consistently get open, especially late in
the stall, and in a dangerous place to make the next throw. The great ones
blend taking opportunities and making opportunities. With handlers, I think
what separates the great ones, beyond just having great throws, is vision.  
  
Vision involves being able to see the field; the whole field, not just the
primary cutters or the play in motion. Spaces are opening and closing, cutters
are changing directions and speeds. A great handler takes all of this in,
anticipating cutters' motions to hit a new space she's cutting into, or
hitting her just as she plants and turns under for max yardage gain. Reads the
body language of a poacher as he starts to step off his man, pump fakes to get
him to bite and then hits his man on the break side. That weak-side handler or
h-stack cutter sneaking down the far sideline can catch his defender sleeping
when the handler sees it developing and puts up the throw.  
  
Besides reading the field in the moment, a great handler will anticipate
changes on the field over the course of a game. Every defense gives up
something, and having vision is knowing where the vulnerabilities lie and how
to take advantage of them using those great throws. A great handler will also
manipulate the defense, capitalizing on areas of weakness and forcing them to
change, opening new opportunities to strike. Take a few deep shots early in
the game in order to set up the easy, big yardage gain in-cuts later in the
game when the defense starts backing. Throwing a few swings around the cup and
entice the off-mark to slide over away from the middle into that lane and bite
on a fake, then hit a popper through the cup.  
  
All of these scenarios involve solid decision-making based on calculated
risks. A great handler knows when that big incredible throw is likely to pay
off, and when it's better to rely on the consistent throws and basic offensive
strategy.
