+++
issue = "021"
title = "Handling: Doing The Little Things"
author = "Jon Remucal"
date = "2009-07-14"
+++

There's a lot more to being a great handler than meets the eye. Being one of
the better throwers on your team is important. But there have been plenty of
teams on which the best thrower is not a handler, especially when it comes to
hucking. This isn't say that being a great thrower doesn't help a handler be
great. Rather, there are a lot of factors and skills that make some handlers
particularly effective.  
  
**Getting the disc**  
Any good handler can deliver a disc after receiving the first pass after a
pull. But the best handlers are able to get open during the normal flow of a
point a high percentage of the time. Of particular importance is being able to
get open for a relatively easy dump throw. A number of factors contribute to a
handler being able to get open, though a few a especially important:  
  
_Know your position._ Great handlers are able to more effectively get open by
actively positioning themselves in relation to the both the disc and their
defender in a way that makes it easier for them to cut or receive the disc.
One player that I learned the value of positioning from when I first arrived
on the club scene was Dan Rydel (Surly, Sub Zero). Dan is not your typical
fast-twitch kind of handler, but he is able to get the disc often and easily
because he positions himself so that the person with the disc can see him and
his defender is forced to choose to take away perhaps one cutting option,
leaving others options open.  
  
_Cut to get open._ We've all heard someone on the sideline yell "Stop
dancing!" before. Getting the disc as a handler is much easier if you sell
your cut. In other words, cut like you mean it. Driving 4-5 steps (as opposed
to 1-2) in one direction puts your defender on her heels and, ideally, forces
her to turn her hips because she believes you're actually going to keep going.
As soon as this happens, you'll be much more likely to be open when you cut in
the other direction. Someone who does this better than anyone I've played with
or against before is Kevin Cissna (Jam). His reliability as a dump was due in
part to his ability to drive his defender in one direction before switching
directions and being open by a couple of yards.  
  
_Go deep!_ One of the best ways to put your defender on her heels is to go
deep to be on the receiving end of a huck from time to time. Doing so forces
your defender to respect the deep cut option, which will help to free you up
around the disc more. Think Kobe Bryant driving to the basket the first couple
of times down the floor in order to put his defender on his heels and set up
an easy pull-up jumper the next time down. There are a lot of handlers that
are willing to go deep, but among the more effective that I've seen are Jeff
Cruckshank (Furious George) and Fortunat Mueller (DOG/Boston).  
  
**Getting rid of the disc**  
Once you've got the disc, being a great thrower only gets you so far. The best
handlers do more than hit deep cuts in stride or slice through a zone defense.
I've been fortunate to play with Damien Scott (Jam) for a few years, and the
things I mention below (as well as those mentioned above) are all things that
Damien does superbly.  
  
Break the mark. The best handlers in the game can break the mark effectively,
and do so often. Breaking the mark opens up the field and forces both the mark
and downfield defenders to play more honest defense. It also leads to my
second point here...  
  
Set up your teammates for success. Putting a huck out in front of a teammate
so she can catch the disc in stride for a goal is an obvious way to set up a
teammate. But often, really great handlers aren't necessarily the ones
throwing the goal. They make the throw that sets up their teammate to throw
the goal. Breaking the mark is one really effective way to set up your
teammate. Once she gets the disc on the break side, she will have a second or
two with a great look down the field for an easy throw to the break side while
her defender is trying catch up and put the mark on.  
  
Do the little things right. I'm stealing a favorite of Team USA coach Greg
Connelly here. But it's absolutely true. There's no doubt that great handlers
have physical skills that allow them to make great throws. But often the thing
that separates the best from the rest is the fact that the best often do the
little things right. Among the many little things, here are a few:  
  
**1.** Don't forget to fake with the disc, especially when you first receive
the disc. This immediately puts the mark on her heels.  
  
**2.** Take the easy throw to keep the disc moving. Some handlers with great
throws hold on to the disc, looking off easy under throws in hopes that a
great look deep will open up. This often hurts an offense more than it helps.  
  
**3.** Face your dump and look to your dump early. Facing your dump allows you
to establish eye contact with her, lets you see how she means to get open, and
puts you in balance and ready to throw from either side of your body. The less
time you give yourself to get off a dump throw, the greater chances the
exchange will result in a turnover.
