+++
issue = "021"
title = "What Else Makes A Good Handler?"
author = "Cara Crouch"
date = "2009-07-14"
+++

Many players in Ultimate have good throws, but that does not necessarily mean
that they are great handlers. The key to becoming a great handler is combining
the mechanics of good throws and a versatile throwing repertoire with three
big picture attributes: awareness, communication, and mind set/attitude.  
  
The first characteristic of a great handler is awareness, or vision. The
ability to evaluate the field at a moment's notice is crucial for calling
plays, or dictating what you want as a thrower. What is the positioning of
your offenders and their defenders? Whose defender is out of position? Are
there poachers about? Has someone set up particularly well for a deep cut?
Great handlers can also apply this keen awareness to their mark in a very
short time period. What plane is the mark taking? Are they sitting heavy on
the inside out or outside in? As soon as you figure these things out, take
what they are giving you or throw from a plane that is not parallel to theirs
by stepping towards or away from them. The last mark of a great handler in the
awareness category is to open your vision. The hardest handlers to mark do not
follow individual cuts with their eyes; they use their peripheral vision and
scan the field instead of following one cutter at a time. Just a note on this:
it is helpful if your team establishes what order you want to scan the field
in. For example, some teams scan deep early in the count, then open side,
break side, and finally the dump space at a higher count. I learned to expand
my vision the hard way by getting hand blocked by Miranda Roth, a great
handler. I also learned to expand my throwing repertoire to include more
creative throws by observing and playing against Roth.  
  
Communication is the second responsibility of a good handler. When you have
the disc you are in control of the game for that short amount of time. You
have the ability to dictate the play by communicating with your cutters about
what you want or do not want, and this can be done through verbal or non
verbal communication. Verbal communication might involve an established play
call or basic directive to a player. Non-verbal communication might involve
more subtle means of communicating through a pump fake, head nod, eye
movement, hand gesture, or another subtle body cue. Lastly, good handler
communication does not only occur on the field. Be vocal with your teammates
about what kind of cuts you like to throw to or spaces you particularly look
to hit.  
  
The last quality of a great handler is mind-set. While playing on Ozone, I
observed Angela Lin and Holly Sommers exude a calm confidence with the disc
that I tried to mimic as a young handler. Besides exhibiting the knowledge
that you are in control, know when to take risks and do it confidently, do not
be too hard on yourself for poor execution (vs. poor decisions), and be
aggressive about quick movement. Lastly, and perhaps most difficult for the
aging Ultimate player in all of us, try to avoid falling into "the handler
trap" mind-set of getting stuck behind the disc. The line between stealth and
sloth is thin and blurry, so if you are inactive make sure it is serving a
purpose.  
  
Matthew Sewell once told me that Ultimate is 60% skill/athleticism and 40%
confidence. Although I am sure he was exaggerating the percentages to instill
confidence in a young player, he was absolutely right about the necessity of a
confident and aggressive attitude. That mind-set, combined with good
communication and a keen awareness, will help turn a good thrower into a great
handler.
