+++
issue = "017"
title = "Limitations To Matchup Theory"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2009-04-27"
+++

Defensive matchups can be a positive aspect of successfully implementing a
defensive strategy, but they can also serve to be a limitation. There are
certain instances where a defender just has another players number and as a
team you would be foolish to not consider that, but if you let certain
matchups become the focus of the defensive strategy it may prevent you from
running the defenses that are most successful for the team. As a defensive
captain, I have always tried to set the defensive philosophy and then let
matchups occur within that strategy.  
  
If a defender feels that he can shut a particular player down, then he'll
usually get a chance to try his hand, but if the player is demanding a matchup
they better also feel the pressure to deliver some results. The teams I've
played on have always set their own assignments on the line, so if a player
makes a request for a matchup they usually get it. Frequently this will lead
to the defender putting some extra pressure on themself to succeed, and
hopefully get their full attention and effort into the matchup. The key is to
balance this within the defensive team play and make sure that, on balance,
the team has good matchups. In this way, I think the assignment of a matchup
coming from the defensive player, rather than initiated from the
coach/captain, gives the defender a chance to succeed because they feel the
most responsibility for the outcome of their matchup.  
  
The matchup for the best defender would really come from the style of the
other team. If they have one big target that the offense likes to throw to,
that would be an obvious choice for the best defender. However, if the team is
a patient team that relies on resets around the disc, I would put the defender
on a handler who the team relies on for resets. Again, putting the defender on
a player that they are confident matching up with will most likely have the
best results.
