+++
issue = "017"
title = "Maximizing Impact"
author = "Brett Matzuka"
date = "2009-04-27"
+++

Lets step away from Ultimate, and assume you are playing a card game in which
there are five random cards face up on the table and you will get dealt five
cards randomly; your job is to pair each one of your cards up with one on the
table. There are many ways of doing this (five to be exact!).  
  
_Example_  
  
Presented on the table: **7 J 3 9 K**  
  
Your cards: **Q 10 5 4 8**  
  
Leaving this as is works perfectly fine.  
  
However, lets say you have an overall objective that you have to pair them up
such that more of your cards are of higher value than those already on the
table. Your job is to maximize your cards effectiveness at beating the other
cards in value.  
  
Using the previous example, if you arrange your cards up so that your high
card is against their high card, you will get the following:  
  

  * K J 9 7 3
  * Q 10 8 5 4

  
  
You will only manage to win one matchup, while losing four of the other
matchups. Now, if you choose your matchups carefully, you can manage to win up
to four of the matchups, out of the five:  
  

  * K J 9 7 3
  * 4 Q 10 8 5

  
  
Ok, so lets step back onto the frisbee field and apply this abstraction. The
point of this is that matching up your best against their best is not the
optimal use of your resources. A defensive unit should utilize their strengths
to maximize their impact on the opposing teams offense.  
  
So, the next question is, how does one do that?  
  
Well, assuming you have an understanding of their offense (vert, horo, etc.),
how they run it (in vert, are they breaking the mark to create flow or jamming
it open side; in horo, do they look to the middle pair or try and hit the
wings), and who is having the biggest impact in keeping it going (is the main
handler anchoring the offense or do they rely on a stud cutter to open up the
downfield), it is a matter of matching up your players to win more of the
matchups.  
  
For example, if they have a standout handler that is the anchor to their
offense, trying to shut them down with your best defender is probably not the
best allocation. A dump is probably still a 90% completion rate with your best
defender on them and if the handler is doing his job, the disc will spend more
time downfield in the flow of the offense, leaving your best defender out of
the play more often than not, minimizing his chances of getting a block.  
  
A better allocation might be a tall defender who's reach can interupt the
handlers first and second options, slowing the offense down. Also, putting
your best defender on a cutter who seems to get a lot of touches would also be
a good option as your best defender will be more involved in the play (can
poach, help easily on deep looks, etc), increasing his chances of getting a
block (downfield cutter getting 3 touches a point with your best defender who
might get a block 10% of the plays he is involved in, means he should get a
block once every 4 points).  
  
This also has a residual effect that the handlers might second guess using
this cutter causing them to use second and third options downfield which will
get higher stall counts, more pressure on guys who may not get the disc as
much to play a more active role, and elongates play, giving your top defender
more chances at a big play downfield.  
  
Just like the card game, you are very rarely going to be able to win every
matchup, and in the cases that you can, you don't need to worry about
defensive matchups. Putting your worst defender on their best player, while
having better matchups on 5 or 6 of the other players may seem
counterintuitive, but can play into your team's hands. You know your team, its
how you use your team's resources that will decide the outcome of the game.
