+++
issue = "010"
title = "Complete Every Huck"
author = "Gwen Ambler"
date = "2008-09-16"
+++

I think a lot of people focus too much on how to throw the disc far rather
than on how to complete their hucks. A lot of time, players will spend hours
practicing throwing the disc really far, but then they don't make disciplined
decisions during a game about when to use those hucks. There are three
questions to ask yourself before unleashing any bomb if you want to increase
the chances of completing that huck:  
  
**1\. Does the cutter have separation?** I am a proponent of throwing to
separation rather than throwing to match-ups. Sure, how much separation a
player needs to be considered "open" will vary from person to person based on
their speed, height, and hops relative to their defender. But the bottom line
is that any cutter needs some steps deep on their defender for it to be a good
decision to put up a bomb to them. That separation is a cushion that will
allow them to get position for any less-than-perfect throw, increasing the
chances of completing your huck even if you don't execute your pass quite the
way you envisioned it.  
  
**2\. Are you adhering to the "rule of thirds" with this huck?** As a cutter,
it is easiest to read and catch a huck when you can approach the disc from a
different angle than the flight path of the disc. As such, the teams I've been
a part of have emphasized the "rule of thirds" for setting up hucks.
Basically, if you divide the field lengthwise into thirds, for any deep shot
either the cutting path of the receiver or the flightpath of the disc needs to
cross from one third into another third of the field. If you stick to this
rule, you will avoid the temptation of throwing a huck down the sideline to an
"open" cutter who is also cutting down that sideline with a narrow window of
opportunity to complete the pass. You will also throw to space more often and
give the receiver the maximum time to read the disc, out-maneuver her
defender, and attack the frisbeeâ€”especially important if the pass wasn't
perfectly thrown.  
  
**3\. Is the point where the receiver can catch a pass in-stride within your
throwing range?** Notice, I said, "Where the receiver can catch a pass in-
stride" not, "Where the receiver is." Hucks often get underthrown when the
thrower misgauges how far away the receiver will be when they'll be making the
catch. Just like you want to lead cutters on shorter cuts, you want to be able
to lead deep receivers as well. Obviously, increasing the distance you can
consistently throw the disc will increase the number of hucking opportunities
for which you can answer "yes" to this question. Ideally, you want to work on
your long throws such that you can put more distance on the disc without
needing to think "I have to throw this pass really far." Often players'
throwing form falls apart when they think they have to do something different
to throw the disc farther. When you only throw within your range, you are more
likely to be able to execute the pass the way you wanted.  
  
Drills to practice long throws should be set up in a way to allow the throwers
to also practice answering these three questions quickly and accurately, which
includes having a defender present on the deep cut.  
  
When working on your throws by yourself in a big open field, practice your
throwing mechanics: gripping the disc tightly, staying balanced on your throw,
generating torque through twisting your torso and hips, and snapping your
wrist as hard as possible. You should imagine a cutter running for each huck
as you put it up and then evaluate whether the disc took the flight path and
landed where you envisioned.
