+++
issue = "010"
title = "Face A Mark"
author = "Jeremy Cram"
date = "2008-09-16"
+++

The most important part of throwing for distance is learning to do so while
facing a mark. It's easy for many players to throw 40+ yards unmarked, but
when someone's standing in front of you, it becomes much more difficult.  
  
Begin your backhand motion with your hips and follow through with your
shoulder and arm. I'm a proponent of bringing the disc straight from the wind-
up point to the release point, as opposed to a more arced path. This sort of
release will give maximum power and result in I/O or flat throws, which
typically make the best hucks. When practicing the backhand huck, try to
release the disc before crossing the plane of your body. Developing a quick
release will allow your hucks to come off naturally in games. People who
release hucks in front of their body will often shortarm hucks, resulting in a
crappy throw, or they'll crush someone's face with their follow-through. So,
lead with the hips, follow with the shoulder and plan on releasing the disc as
it reaches the plane of your body. You should be able to get a good wrist snap
to add some distance as well.  
  
Flick hucks are similar to backhands in that power should come primarily from
your core. Lead with the hips and shoulders, then let your wrist do the rest.  
  
For both forehand and backhands, power should be generated primarily by the
torso. Open-side hucking is easy on the flick side because it releases very
quickly, but on the backhand side, a good marker will be able to pressure the
slower throw and infringe on your follow through space.  
  
Pulling is a essentially an exagerated backhand huck where you get to run up.
First, establish a footwork routine that you will follow for all of your
pulls. For me, I take three steps and release. If pulling upwind, try to ride
any semblance of angle the wind gives you. The field is 40 yards wide. From
one corner you should be able to throw further if you ride some of the
crosswind. In severe wind incorporating a 360Â° spin at your release can add
some distance, which is handy during hurricane season. A good pull is
primarily about keeping it in play. OB pulls are no good. Secondarily, finding
the right balance between distance and height is key. Hangtime allows the
defense to set up while distance without good hangtime is less useful. It's
better to throw 65 yard pulls that are well covered than 85 yard pulls that
are line drives.  
  
I think the best way to expand your range is to throw a lot. Because you can't
necessarily do so in game situations, throwing casually can help. Just make
sure to be bettering your form at all times. If you relax your form, then any
work you put in will be pointless. Work on throwing hucks as if there were a
mark, even if you're throwing on the open side. As a general rule, I'd say if
you can't throw a flat huck, then don't throw one so work on long flat throws.
