+++
issue = "032"
title = "[kuhl-cher]"
author = "John Korber"
date = "2011-03-31"
+++

_Culture [kuhl-cher] -noun: the attitudes and behavior that are characteristic
of a particular social group or organization._  
  
Successful teams, sometimes by accident, but more often by design, share
amongst their members a common set of values, attitudes and goals. These
characteristics define the identity of a given team, and ultimately create the
culture of that team.  
  
Everything about the actions of the team is a function of these
characteristics, right down to the definition of success itself. A team that
values equal playing time for all players could consider a tournament without
winning a game a successful one…while clearly plenty of other teams would not.
A team’s culture helps define where it wants to go and how it wants to get
there. Core to the success of any team is an agreement, unspoken, implied, or
in writing, between its members on these things. Leading a group of people who
do not share a minimum of them in common is both incredibly difficult and
incredibly stressful.  
  
I believe that a team’s leadership has a responsibility to lead the team in a
direction consistent with its culture. In some cases (like some youth sports
or the business world), it can be appropriate for leadership to impose values,
attitudes and goals onto the members of the team. In cases where the leaders
function more as peers (as is common on many ultimate teams), the leaders only
have a limited ability to influence the team’s culture.  
  
Captains can be highly effective leading a team where it wants go, but should
be cautious about trying to lead a team somewhere else. If your team of sheep
are happy being sheep, you probably will not have much success trying to make
them into wolves. It takes a tremendous amount of poise and character for a
captain to lead a team somewhere away from his or her own goals, but our
obligations as a leaders are to lead our teams where they want to go…or to let
someone else do it.  
  
Recently, I have led two very different ultimate teams. The first played most
recently at the USAU Club Championships and was formed through careful
recruiting and selection. Its members shared values and goals from day one.
The other played indoors in a local recreational league and was formed through
a random draft. Its members had little in common other than living in the same
general area and looking for a good time on the field one night each week.  
  
As expected, the teams differed greatly in many ways. One team consisted of
mature players with polished skills and refined personal drive. The other had
several players who had never heard of a stall count, could not throw a
forehand, and had never heard of the USAU.  
  
My leadership of these two teams varied as greatly as their makeups, but one
constant persisted. I worked as hard as I could to deliver an ultimate
experience consistent with the expectations, values and attitudes of my
teammates. On the one hand, this included track workouts, sophisticated
defensive schemes and goals for success at Nationals. On the other, teaching
basic rules, the shirt colors which could be considered ‘dark’ and the
importance of stretching were more appropriate.  
  
While the cultures of the teams clearly varied, my responsibilities as a
leader remained unchanged: lead the team to the place that it wants to go
using means consistent with its culture. My recreational league teammates did
not want to hear "Just work harder!" any more than my club teammates wanted to
hear "Well, at least we are all having a fun time!"  
  
A team’s culture is central to its existence, identity and success.  
  
If you already have a team to lead, it is important to understand the value
and goals of your teammates. For example, what would a majority of them
consider a successful season? Going undefeated? Sharing playing time equally?
How do they want to achieve this success? Holding shorter practices? Running
more track workouts? Partying harder together more often?  
  
If you are starting a new team, you have some flexibility to recruit players
who share your values and goals. Make your values clear before and during
tryouts and encourage people who share your values to come out. In the end,
identifying (and leading in a manner consistent with) your team’s culture will
have a significant effect on your effectiveness as a leader.
