+++
issue = "032"
title = "Nuture What You Like, Overcome What You Don't"
author = "Peri Kurshan"
date = "2011-03-31"
+++

Team culture can often be overlooked as an important contributor to your
team’s success, both in the short and long term. The culture of your team
determines what types of players will be attracted to the team, will enjoy
playing on your team, and will stick around season after season. There is no
one "right" team culture, and it can be defined as much from the actions of a
single individual (founder, strong personality, etc) as shaped over time by
the collective actions and personalities of the group. Once your team is known
as having a particular team culture though, it is very hard to overcome that
perception, even once the reality has changed. So it is worthwhile identifying
your team culture (real or perceived!), nurturing what you like, and trying to
overcome what you don’t like.  
  
Many aspects of team culture are neither positive nor negative, but depend on
individual preferences. Some players want to play on a team that’s known for
being hard-working and disciplined, others prefer to be involved with a team
that prioritizes having fun and giving people freedom to expand their personal
game. Some players want to win above all else; others want most of all to play
with people they like. Some people like playing on a team where direction
comes clearly and succinctly from above, others prefer a team where there is
room for more people to be involved in decision-making. Most of us fall
somewhere in the middle on all of these, but it’s worth figuring out where on
the spectrum the preferences of the team as a whole lie. It’s a good exercise
to do with your team at the beginning of each season- determine not only what
your team’s goals are for that season, but what the team’s priorities are in
terms of team culture. Sometimes this type of conversation will highlight the
fact that the team’s goals and team culture priorities are not aligned!  
  
Once you’ve identified what you want your team culture to be, incorporate
elements of it into your practices and communications. Make sure to explain
why things are being done a certain way (e.g. sprints for turnovers, or taking
a weekend off so people can go play at a fun coed tournament) in terms of what
you’ve collectively decided is the team’s culture. Try to ensure that big team
decisions (schedule, type of offense, etc) are made with fostering the team’s
culture in mind.  
  
For many of us, playing Ultimate is such an important part of our lives that
we can forget that when it comes down to it, we’re doing this for fun! It’s
worthwhile then to try to make sure that our team’s culture reflects what we
as individuals value most about the game.
