+++
issue = "032"
title = "Work Together"
author = "Charlie Rezikoff"
date = "2011-03-31"
+++

Ultimate is a sport of independent minded players—players who like to self-
govern—and in ultimate a wide range of personal investment and work ethic on a
given team is common. This creates a difficult situation: the headstrong
leader yelling about commitment as the fun loving party-captain rolls his
eyes. Forming a single team identity can be daunting. The most important step
is to get everyone together doing something other than playing ultimate. Often
teams try to define their identity in a team meeting. This is fine—if you want
a team whose identity it is to meet and talk about your feelings, but usually
these meetings highlight differences more than create unity. Instead, throw a
theme party. Go disc golfing. Meet at the local burrito joint after practices.
Rent a beach house rather than hotel rooms. Work out together. Twenty-plus
guys in the weight room at your university’s gym? Hilarious antics occur,
freshmen learn safe weight training from seniors, people get to know each
other casually, and your team improves its fitness. That team time will lay
the foundation of trust on which you build your identity.  
  
Strong teams weather disagreement. If two players who dislike each other can
coexist, that highlights your team’s unity. Try pairing these two hotheads in
a drill that makes them work together. You might be surprised to find how well
they do when they share a goal. You may need to have the two talk out their
differences. When mediating, always put your team first. Remind them that when
teammates argue the team doesn’t win or have fun. But disagreement about team
identity is different from refusing to participate in team identity. Some
players want the benefits of being on your team (usually playing time) yet
undermine team events. The more valuable the player with his cleats on, the
more destructive he can be to the team energy. Established teams know that
these dissenters must be cut or the team will have a frustrating season. If
what he wants does not fit what your team needs, then his departure will
reinforce your team identity. If your team thinks you communicated poorly with
this player, then his departure will hurt your team. So when cutting such a
player, make the cut about team unity.  
  
One cold rainy April day, the Hodags found themselves playing sloppily against
an inferior opponent. Bryan Paradise, the team captain, exploded with anger,
threw chairs away from the sideline, forced his teammates to stand, and yelled
"now we become men!" Had Bryan tried that stunt in November, it would have
backfired; had he waited till May, it would have been too late. Bryan had the
social intelligence, or the luck, to challenge his team in the right way at
the right time. That season the Hodags won their first championship. Every
team needs a charismatic leader to articulate its identity. When you find that
leader empower him to speak in your huddle. He will remind your team why they
love playing ultimate.
