+++
issue = "030"
title = "It Takes Practice"
author = "Moses Rifkin"
date = "2011-01-20"
+++

Like any team, Death or Glory had its own mythology. As a green twenty-year
old, very few tales of the past loomed as large for me as Paul Greff’s block
against the Condors in 1998. It seemed told and told again: as the deep in the
zone at a critical point, Paul hears someone on the sideline telling him to
drop and he does, without looking, just in time to get a game saving block.
The message was clear - sideline voice won DoG a national championship - and I
was hooked.  
  
Effective communication from the players on the sideline can be a crucial
advantage for a team. Sideline communication can improve your team’s level of
play by allowing defenders to respond to more than they can see. The sidelines
can remind players of strategic goals that get lost in the shuffle and can
bring a team together in a new way. I think sideline voice is something I’m
very good at. It’s something I’m as proud of, and work as much at, as any more
visible part of my game.  
  
However, I think it’s very hard to do effectively. Playing Ultimate is
physically demanding, and having a second job to do when you come off the
field is often overwhelming. Most teams are unsuccessful when it comes to
sideline communication – you’re reading this, aren’t you? Becoming successful
requires a shift in team mentality, hard work, and practice time just like any
team concept.  
  
I would argue that the majority of team’s difficulties comes from players not
knowing what to say, or not being compelled to put in the work. On DoG,
participation from the sideline was a given. It was woven into what it meant
to be on the team. On Sockeye, we spend practice time talking about our goals
and strategy for communication. I know that the prompt for this article has to
do with how I talk on the sideline, and I’ll get to that. But I think it’s
most important to focus on how to lay a team-wide foundation.  
  
We’ve changed things over the years on Sockeye, but have recently found that
it’s effective for each player on the sideline to have just one or two people
that they are always responsible for. When Skip or Reid are on the field, I
know that I need to talk to them, and they can expect to hear my voice.
Everyone has a small group like this. This is a little less daunting, I think,
than the amorphous sense that I should be talking to ‘someone’, and allows me
to learn what sorts of things these two players need to hear and how to best
communicate with them.  
  
Once we have our posse, each year we spend about fifteen minutes talking about
the "why and how" of our sideline communication. By talking about why we do
this, why it’s important, we are helping everyone to buy in – nobody likes
working hard on the mark, but we do it because we all understand why it’s
important. The difference with sideline voice is that it’s not as visibly
clear why you need it…but you do.  
  
I mentioned before that not knowing what to say can be the biggest impediment
to talking from the sideline, and so we work hard to define as a team what
sorts of things need to be relayed from the sideline and how to do so. We keep
our vocabulary simple – ‘in’, ‘out’, ‘left’, ‘right’, ‘no break’, etc. – in
the hopes that it becomes easy for everyone to open their mouth and easy to
respond to what is heard. The goal here is to take the thinking out of yelling
and listening.  
  
From there, we walk through what each point will look like from the sideline’s
perspective. The vast majority of our sideline talk happens when we’re on
defense, either pulling or after an offensive turnover. We expect everyone to
know the defense we’re playing. We use a simple code for relaying this
information, believing that it’s more important for us to know the defense
than it is for us to hide it from the other team. In practice we emphasize the
importance of everyone understanding each defense as we work on it, even
players who will never play it. I can’t remember the last time I was on the
field for a zone defense, but by understanding the role of a wing in our 4-man
cup, I can help communicate in the way that he needs.  
  
From there it’s up to me, as an individual, to follow through. Before the
point starts, I make an effort to verbally connect with the person I’m talking
to ("Skip, I’m your voice"). Much of my success on the sideline depends on
being heard amidst the other yelling, and I want him to hear my voice and know
that that’s what to listen for. Throughout the point, I try to make sure that
he won’t lose that thread, and that means continually saying something – "Skip
in, Skip in, Skip you’re fine, Skip you’re good, Skip left, Skip left, Skip
mark, Skip mark!" – while staying as close to him as I can. It means following
him up and down the field on the sideline, and means resisting the urge to
watch the play to see what happens.  
  
If this sounds like hard work, it is. It takes practice, just like anything
else. Just like the timing of my cutting, I find that I feel bad about my
sideline voice until around Regionals where I start to really hit my stride –
but it’s worth it. When Skip or Reid get a block, I crow to my teammates
"That’s my block!". False puffery, sure, but it’s also a reflection of the
fact that I do believe that I contribute to their successes (and they tell me
as much), and it feels great in the moments that the work pays off. It’s worth
it.  
  
One last thought: we’ve all felt the ebb and flow of a game, and we talk on
Sockeye as one way of having some control over the game’s momentum. Staying
active from the sideline can feel easy when your team is cruising, but
maintaining that same energy when you’re down a few breaks is when it really
matters most. Turning the tide doesn’t just happen, and I think rising to meet
that challenge from the sideline is one of the things that most teams ignore.  
  
I encourage you to treat the development of a culture of sideline voice just
as you would any other part of your team. Set team expectations for sideline
voice just like you do for practice attendance and hold your teammates
accountable in the same way. Practice your sideline strategy and
implementation. Set goals for tournaments and revisit those goals after each
game. Try talking from the sideline (and responding to what you hear, which is
another skill unto itself) at practice just as you hope to in a game.  
  
These aren’t revolutionary suggestions for any on-field skill, and I think
they pay dividends just as much for sideline communication. Being good at this
as a team WILL help you win games, and it WILL make the experience more fun.
It’s not easy, but when you have twenty teammates yelling and high-fiving on
the sideline of a sweltering tournament game while your opponents cringe in
the shade tent, when you come home from tournaments hoarse and happy, when you
respond to a voice to get the block that wins a national championship, you’ll
see that it feels worth it.
