+++
issue = "030"
title = "Loud + Positive = Good"
author = "Miranda Roth"
date = "2011-01-20"
+++

I think that sideline contributions are underrated in their worth by most
teams and particularly by most great players. People who are great at team
sports are not necessarily motivated to play well for themselves – especially
in our sport, they are motivated to play well by their love of team, teammates
and something bigger than themselves.  
  
In this way, I will stand by something I accidentally said in a huddle last
year: "Loud information is good information." Now, of course this is a
generalization, but particularly when you are teaching people who are shy or
new to sideline talk what to do, first things first you must be loud! You must
make an impact on your teammate’s game and if you are speaking quietly, your
impact will be lost. No matter what you say, make it loud – cup your hands
around your mouth, deepen your voice and yell.  
  
As someone who is mostly involved with women’s and youth ultimate, I can say
that from the sideline, you should be darn close to 100% positive and
informational. Especially on offense, cheering is the best way to help – it is
difficult to react to direction from the sideline when you are doing your best
to read the defense, thrower, and other cutters. On defense, "up" calls and
talking to the mark are the most important but still you must be LOUD!
Negativity will motivate only about 1% of the ultimate players out there so
unless you know your player very well, stick to the positive and maybe provide
constructive observations after the point.  
  
Effective sideline talk is a part of every great team’s success. If you talk
well from the sideline you will feel more bought in, you will be engaged in
every point (no loss of focus), and you will make a bigger positive impact on
every game. Just a taste of what it’s like trying to be a good coach.
