+++
issue = "030"
title = "Make It Useful"
author = "Jim Parinella"
date = "2011-01-20"
+++

Basic principles of sideline talk are fairly simple: make it targeted (say the
player’s name first), make it specific (not just "c’mon, go, go"), and give
information (not instruction). You may not know what the player already knows
and is planning, so this lets him decide what to do and how to handle the
info. (Sometimes, if the level of trust is high, off-field players can give
instructions rather than information.)  
  
On each point, especially in zone D, establish a one-to-one relationship, so
Tom and only Tom is talking to Joe (although occasionally Joe needs to hear
from Fred on the other side of the field). On some occasions, a simple
exhortation to try harder can be good enough, but don’t forget to throw an
occasional compliment for a good defensive effort that results in nothing more
than taking away an option.  
  
On offense, less is generally more. Telling a receiver "No one" (is making an
effort to block the pass) or (beware of the) "man on" is about the only thing
I like to hear on the field from the sideline. Please don’t call my name
unless I really need to know something immediately. Another possibility is to
stand behind the thrower in a trap situation to give the thrower an extra
second sometimes to find the open guy.  
  
By now, though, I think the above might qualify as conventional wisdom, and
there are some dominant personalities on each team that are going to control
the sideline talk. As a quiet guy (despite the volumes of writing), I find
that there are things that I can do, that the majority do not, that fit my
style and can help the team.  
  
When we’re on defense, I will position myself farther downfield than any of
the players. This way, I can see the hucks coming even before they are thrown,
and yell at the defender to get him on his horse to catch up and then direct
him once the pass is up (and even to be in position in an unobserved game to
call in/out or offer advice on a foul call). One downside is that this
isolates you from the rest of the team, but take heart in knowing that you can
add a turnover or two per tournament.
