+++
issue = "030"
title = "Standardizing A Team Way Of Communicating"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2011-01-20"
+++

Different teams have a very different approach to the role of individuals when
they’re on the sideline. Some teams like to give the players on the sideline a
chance to rest and have them sit in the shade to recover for their next time
in the game. Others, especially in the college ranks, can have countless
players making tons of useless noise from the sidelines. I think the best
teams find a way to keep players involved in the success of the team when they
are not one of the seven guys on the field. There are countless ways to do
this.  
  
Offensively, teams usually have a set of phrases that may define their
offensive objective. Things like "swing" (the disc), "keep cutting" or (move
the disc to the) "middle" are keywords that remind players to look for
specific throws or cuts within the context of the offense. These cues can
serve as helpful ways to influence the play on the field, while not over-
coaching or distracting the players from doing their things. In zone offense,
there is a possibility for even more talk from the sideline to help position
players or point out something that a thrower might be missing. However, I’ve
generally thought that offenses are better left to work without the
distraction of a lot of sideline input.  
  
Defensively there is a much greater opportunity for the sidelines to
contribute to the onfield performance. The most basic is to give players "up"
calls when the disc is in the air. Putting a name on the end of that up call,
is the next step for helping the individual who the disc is going to. The next
step is for the sideline to be aware of the defense for that point, as well as
the general defensive philosophy. Does the dump defender overplay the
backwards pass, or protect against the dump going upfield? Is the marker
pressuring a backwards pass, possibly at the cost of giving up an inside-out
break throw? If the sideline knows the defensive priorities they can instruct
both the dump and the marker about a subtle shift in positioning to work
within the defensive concept. Telling the marker where that dump cutter is
with predetermined words ("left", "right", "45", "flat", "strike") can make
the marker much more effective with simple phrases.  
  
In the zone there is an even greater chance for the sideline to help. Because
of the nature of zone defense, it is possible for a sideline player to talk to
a single onfield player for the entire point. Effective sideline communicators
will keep a continuous stream of talk to help the player stay with that voice.
I’ve also found that a name, followed by an instruction is a much better way
to communicate than just yelling instructions. For example, "Greg drop, Greg
right, Greg you’re good" tells Greg to drop, move right, and then stay where
he is. There are a number of phrases that can speak to specific actions, but
each team may have different terms for those. However, the continuous flow of
information from the sidelines to the field will help players be their most
responsive to sideline communication.  
  
Finally, sidelines can do a lot to pump up players on the field, or similarly,
contribute to the mood of an ugly game. Condors had a simple rule that you
don’t talk to the other team’s onfield players from the sideline. If an
opponent made a bad call, telling your teammate that he made a great play gets
the same message across as telling the opponent he is a cheater. However, by
doing the former you are pumping up your team while possibly creating doubt in
the opponent, while the latter overlooks your teammate’s play and may inspire
the opponent. Sidelines can also do well in creating an intimidating presence
with strong communication and forceful encouragement. Just the act of knowing
that a teammate is watching me is usually enough to make me give maximum
effort and do my best. With seven onfield players channeling that energy, a
team can be lifted to a higher level of play.
