+++
issue = "030"
title = "The Zone"
author = "Ben van Heuvelen"
date = "2011-01-20"
+++

In the moment of competition, I like my brain to be functioning on
approximately the level of a caveman chasing a woolly mammoth. The biggest
motivation to help from the sideline is that the louder I yell, the more
primordial I feel, and the better I play. It’s the best way for me to get in
and stay in "the zone."  
  
Here is a great description of the zone, which I recently read in a novel:  
  
"She felt a special private connection with the basket, always knowing exactly
where it was and always trusting that she was its favorite player on the
floor, the best at feeding its circular mouth. Even off the court she existed
in the zone, which felt like a kind of preoccupied pressure behind her
eyebrows, an alert drowsiness or focused dumbness that persisted no matter
what she was doing."  
  
This "focused dumbness" is the goal of my training. My hours spent throwing,
running drills, and scrimmaging are all designed to teach my brain and muscles
to respond instantly without thought. When I’m competing, my conscious mind
can only get in the way and slow me down. This is what we mean when we tell
our teammates, "Get out of your head," or, "Get into the game": Stop thinking;
just do it.  
  
The most vulnerable time for players, psychologically speaking, is when we’re
not playing. That’s when we have time to think. Joe Montana said, "As soon as
you know you’re in the zone, you’re not in the zone." Why is that? Because the
part of your brain that can make that kind of realization is not the caveman
part of your brain. (Sure, it’s possible to be both a great player and a great
thinker – but not simultaneously.)  
  
My goal on the sideline is to leave no room for reflective thought by focusing
totally on the game. I talk with teammates about what they’ve been doing well
or what we’re going to do next point to respond to our opponent’s tactics. I
yell team cheers. I pick a teammate on the line and shout specific information
throughout the point. ("Big thrower"; "not a thrower"; "disc is swinging"; "no
huck"; "all underneath"; "left hand low"; "last back"; etc.) Halfway through
the point, I usually get distracted by another teammate who needs a good bout
of yelling and I get in his ear.  
  
I yell the most specific and concrete information possible. General
encouragement is great ("keep working hard"), but my teammate is less likely
to have his mark broken if I’m yelling "stay on your toes" or "rotate no
around". Also, the more specific the information I yell, the more focused I
have to be on the game.  
  
I try to yell only positive things. Any time I say something negative, even
under my breath, I allow the thought to enter my mind that "things aren’t
going well." It’s not long before that thought ruins the useful illusion –
which is a big part of "the zone" – that my team and I are unstoppable.  
  
If I’m successful on the sidelines, when I step back on the line to play, it
feels like I never left the game. In other words, I’m still "in my rhythm."
I’m sure the sideline talk has also helped my teammates but the biggest
benefit is my own. I get another shot at playing in the zone.
