+++
issue = "030"
title = "Two Things Durings A Point"
author = "Jeff Eastham-Anderson"
date = "2011-01-20"
+++

When you find yourself on the sideline, there are two obvious things to do
during a point. You should serve as an extra brain and pair of eyes to help
them execute the team’s strategy, and you need to encourage them to keep
putting in effort. I’ll skip over these two aspects of sideline help (which I
hope others will cover in more detail), and focus on one aspect which takes
place after a point is over, and one aspect which is believed to be helpful,
but is frequently not, and should be discouraged.  
  
A mistake/learning opportunity during the middle of a point is hard for a
player on the field to capitalize on their own because they were thinking
about the 50 other things which happened during that point. However, a
teammate on the sideline is in a much better situation to recognize, remember,
offer perspective, and therefore help teammates improve. If you have trouble
remembering, write it down. If you’re not sure how a mistake might be
corrected, or if a mistake was made at all, talk to a more experienced
teammate. In my opinion it is better to watch one person the entire point, as
opposed to many people. Not only can you help that person in real-time, but
you can also get a feel for what that person was trying to do, instead of
taking one mistake out of context.  
  
Finally, just because the point is over doesn’t mean you need to stop
encouraging the teammate you’ve been watching. If you didn’t notice any
mistakes, praise their effort. In fact, even if you did notice something they
could improve upon, that doesn’t mean you should ignore the rest of the point
where they were playing well. Give praise where praise is due.  
  
The one thing I’ve never been a fan of is a sideline voice that tells me to do
something which is the right play in a vacuum, but is contradictory to the
team’s strategy. Practically speaking, the chain of events which must take
place is often way too slow to be helpful. A person on the sideline needs to
recognize what’s going to happen, figure out the appropriate response,
communicate it to someone on the field, who then needs to recognize and react
in a way they weren’t anticipating. Furthermore, the principle of playing on a
team and having a cohesive strategy is undermined every time someone
freelances, and is made worse when your own teammate is encouraging you to do
so.  
  
Every time a player does something unexpected, there is almost always a trade-
off which weakens the approach a team is taking. A prime example of this is a
[strike call on a sideline
trap](http://web.archive.org/web/20220101010101/http://www.superpowers.us/ultimate.html#advanced.defense.mark.strike).
You hear this call quite a bit, but acting on a strike call does two things.
First, the marker is giving up the portion of the field the rest of the team
is expecting them to take away. Second, it helps out a defender who was beat
to a position of the field that was their responsibility to take away, not the
marker’s. So, not only is the marker rewarding that one defender who was beat
by trying to cover for their mistake, but by changing the mark they are
screwing the other five defenders by letting off an easy break mark throw.
This isn’t to say strike calls are bad. But your team needs to decide that
occasionally stopping that throw is worth the mark abandoning the portion of
the field for which they are responsible.
