+++
issue = "020"
title = "Countering & Changing Defenses"
author = "Miranda Roth"
date = "2009-06-09"
+++

While I have not been personally very successful in this situation, other
teams have been successful at times against my teams so I can tell you what it
seems like they did. You must call tight lines—having players in the games
that can create Ds and capitalize on them is imperative. Now is not the time
to give players a chance to show their stuff for the first time—use people
that are tried and true on D and O. This may mean that these players are
playing a lot, but thems the breaks—they ought to be in good enough shape to
hang tough through this time. In terms of strategy, it might be time to change
something up. If your D has been creating Ds but you just haven't been able to
score, you may think about switching to focusing on either fast-breaking or
settling down. If your D has not been creating Ds, you might consider trying a
new D.  
  
In the 2008 Women's Final, which was probably the best comeback to ever occur
in ultimate, Fury changed their D sometime around halftime or right after the
second half started. It was windy and we run a two handler crashing from
behind zone offense. They switched to guarding our crashing handler almost
like a box-and-1 with a huge cup around them. This flustered our handlers and
we were unable to adapt, opening the door for a huge and devastating comeback
by them. I'm guessing that they just took it point by point or broke the
points into games to three. Oftentimes teams can be successful just focusing
on shorter goals rather than thinking, "we have to score 10 times to be back
in this game." On an individual level, it is important not to focus too much
on yourself and take too much of the responsibility of catching up, even if
you are playing a lot at this crucial time.
