+++
issue = "019"
title = "Bide Your Time"
author = "Tully Beatty"
date = "2009-05-27"
+++

D, they say, is for dummies. But no D player worth their salt should have the
ability to do anything more than stare at their big toe Saturday night at the
hotel. Why? Because they should be too mentally taxed from keeping the stall
count each time they step on the field for D. I'm not talking about counting
the stall when marking your assignment; I'm talking about keeping the stall
when playing D in the stack or spread. Any O player doing the same thing at
stall 4 and stall 8 is giving their defender at chance at the grail. Of course
you can't do it every possession of every point of every game early in the
series and you shouldn't need to do it you're a 1 seed facing a 16 seed, but
by the 3rd round at sectionals, it's time to say goodbye to Mickey Mouse
Frisbee and work yourself into a mental lather; and if you're on a team that
demands up-calls and a vocal sideline, then even better for you. Obviously
it's more difficult when defending the spread, but if you bide your time and
sit on a team's offense long enough and other defenders are digging in, you
figure the O out and sometimes you get the grail, other times you see yourself
in its reflection.  
  
Hard to believe it's almost been ten years, but my wife's block vs RFBF in the
'99 Mixed finals is the best layout block I've ever seen. The block earned her
a concussion and the Llama a trip to Germany [and recently I read where
someone said Mixed is for pansies]. A deep shot was sent to the girl she was
guarding but Matt Hull leaped a got a finger on the disc, deflecting its
course and Amy was able to come back under, layout and knock it down,
simultaneously taking a knee to the back of the head and getting knocked the
hell out.  
  
On a lighter note, at Fools one year, I saw KD, after shot-gunning not one but
two beers during a time-out, get a layout block on a dump pass that was thrown
by the guy he was marking. The pass couldn't have gone two yards before he
blocked it. It was pretty sweet.
