+++
issue = "019"
title = "Recognition & Position"
author = "Jeff Eastham-Anderson"
date = "2009-05-27"
+++

Two key factors of getting a block are:

  * Being able to recognize mistakes by the offense
  * Being in a good position to capitalize upon them

  
Being faster than the person you're guarding helps, but paying attention to
these two aspects will help your team defensively.  
  
When it comes to positioning, as a defender I rarely bait throws in
anticipation of a layout block, especially when it comes to cuts that are
close to the disc. There is so little time to react, that my defensive goal is
to deny the throw. It just happens that the position to deny those kinds of
throws (even with or trailing the offensive player slightly, on the side
closest to the thrower), also allows for the occasional layout attempt. If you
are directly behind, or on the wrong side of the receiver, layout bids become
more difficult, and can be very dangerous to everyone involved.  
  
Recognizing when the offense makes a mistake is the other key factor that
determines whether or not you should make a layout attempt. For the majority
of layout blocks I get, I knew when and where the disc was going to be thrown
at the same time as, or earlier than, the receiver. Being able to look
directly at the thrower, and keep the receiver in my peripheral vision gives
me equal footing when it comes to making a play on the disc. Alternatively, if
the receiver is making a one dimensional cut (i.e. the disc will be thrown to
them at point X, or not all), this also lets me get into a good defensive
position, and ready to make a bid.  
  
Once the disc is in the air and I've decided I'm going attempt a block, if my
positioning is good I can choose the best line to take to get to the disc
without having to worry about what the receiver is doing. Whatever line the
receiver chooses, the defender has a bit of an advantage here as they do not
have to actually catch the disc. The slightest tip with a finger, or the mere
presence of your body, is sometimes good enough. The only real insight I have
on execution is that I try to drive off of the last step I take, just as I
would if I was jumping in the air. Just because you're running as fast as you
can doesn't mean you should stop running and fall forward in the hope of
getting a block.  
  
I'm not really sure how you learn the body motions to successfully make a
block. Certainly there is timing involved, and landing in a controlled manner
is a plus. A high-jump mat, or sand pit would reduce the wear and tear, but at
some point you're going to have to graduate to the hard stuff. As I mentioned
above, drive off the last step you take. The primary impact should be taken by
your abdomen hitting the ground as flatly as possible. After every practice
attempt, get up as quickly as possible and set an imaginary mark. Not every
bid is successful, and you will have set the mark if you miss.
