+++
issue = "019"
title = "The Value Of A Layout Block?"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2009-05-27"
+++

I'm frequently torn between the value of a layout block versus just shutting
your guy down to the point that he's not thrown to. Layout blocks, at least at
the elite level, are typically the result of a bad decision or throw by the
thrower, because it is very tough to get around elite receivers, and you're
generally just not going to make up enough ground to go from a guy being open
to you blocking him unless the throw is in a bad spot or the receiver does a
terrible job of sealing you. That being said, I think there is definitely an
art to putting yourself in this position so that when the opportunity comes
you can take advantage.  
  
The primary factor is desire. Whether it's the desire to keep your guy from
getting it, to get the disc or win the glory of making that play, something
has to be ticking in the defender's head that will make him hurl his body at
the disc. Learning the game in California we would occasionally work out and
play on the beach where the potential for injury dramatically decreases and
you start to think that maybe that's possible on grass too. However, despite
training and practice, at some level the layout block is an uncontrolled
action with the prime motivation to get the disc. The mind just has stay out
of the way and let the body do its thing.  
  
I've seen a lot of great blocks in big games, many of them for or against the
team I was playing on, which can bias me. However, one that I saw early in my
career, at my first nationals, is one of the few I remember that didn't
involve my team. It was Boston DoG, and I believe it was their epic semifinal
of 1997 against Ring of Fire. Boston pulls during their epic comeback (they
were down like 7-1 to start the game) and one of the markers in their
clam/zone is sprinting down and the first pass is about to get thrown right by
him. As he's sprinting he somehow launches his body at a nearly right-angle to
his left and about chest high. I actually cant even remember if he got the
block, but I know it was a super-human effort for a pass that, while it was
his responsibility, wasn't really to his man. As he came do the ground he
didn't get up and the word was that he tore his ACL, or something in his knee.
Boston went on to win that semifinal, and ultimately take down Sockeye in the
final.
