+++
issue = "025"
title = "Preventative vs. Deceptive"
author = "Brett Matzuka"
date = "2009-10-14"
+++

The most common mark you see on the frisbee field is what I would define as a
preventative mark. The mark has each arm extended out fully, explicitly placed
to take away a specific throw. This is a useful mark as it does prevent the
intended throws and it is seen at every level of frisbee (see photo 1).
However, though it is useful, it has certain disadvantages. It allows the
thrower to know which throws you are trying to take away before they even
attempt to throw or fake. This will allow the thrower to find the gaps in the
mark and exploit them. Looking over the Japanese mark, you can see that the
thrower has yet to initiate a throwing motion, or fake, and the mark already
has her arms fully extended. The thrower can now find the gaps and use these
for release points in her throw.  

![Issue025 Matzuka
photo1](https://www.usaultimate.org/assets/1/News/Issue025_Matzuka_photo1.jpg)  
Photo 1

  
  
What I find helps to apply more pressure to throwers on most levels is what I
would call a deceptive mark. Instead of fully extending your arms out in a way
that gives the thrower knowledge on what you are trying to prevent, keep your
arms closer to your sides, ready to pounce out once the thrower has committed
to a throwing motion. As can be seen, Thomas Ward of NC State, and Ring of
Fire, has his arms close to his sides and ready to strike once the thrower has
committed to an option. Since they are tight to his side while the thrower is
not in a throwing motion, this does not allow the thrower to find holes and
gaps in the arms to exploit as before. While it does not guarantee that you
will prevent the respective throw you are trying to stop every time as the
previously mentioned mark will (having your arm constantly up to prevent a
high release will certainly stop it, but may give up other throws), it will
force the thrower to work harder to get a throw off (they may try to throw a
inside break backhand and your hand appears, which makes them work harder by
faking multiple times to get the option they want).  
  

![Issue025 Matzuka
photo2](https://www.usaultimate.org/assets/1/News/Issue025_Matzuka_photo2.jpg)  
Photo 2

  
In general, a foot block is not earned by constantly holding your foot in the
air where you think they will release it, but by executing right when they
enter into their throwing motion. This same idea can be utilized with your
arms, and is useful, to apply more pressure to the thrower.
