+++
issue = "001"
title = "Advantages Of Either Offensive Set"
author = "Dan Heijman"
date = "2008-05-20"
+++

First and foremost I will say that I am completely biased in favor of a
horizontal based offense in a non-windy environment. While there are certain
advantages in starting out of a vertical, I believe that a horizontal flow
gives players the maximum amount of freedom and space to run the offense.
However, in windy conditions (depending on the severity) vertical, if run
correctly, does have its advantages.

Provided that the wind isn't brutal (i.e. less than 20 MPH), I think
horizontal is the way to go. Given the athletes that are playing the game
today, I think you need to put them in space and let their legs do the work.
This offense, when run correctly, is incredibly difficult to stop because it
allows tremendous freedom for all players. Cutters can choose to go in or cut
deep on a whim, and can also adjust mid-cut if they see a break lane open up.

When attacking downwind defenders are often so worried about getting beaten
deep that smart cutters can take twenty-yard unders whenever they choose. And
if the defense adjusts, you can let the hucks rain. Obviously any huck-happy
offense will face a rise in turnovers, but depending on the wind, and the
level of competition, this could be a risk worth taking. Few D-lines will be
able to effectively move the disc upwind with any consistency if they have to
go the full 70 yards to score.

When attacking upwind you could choose to go either way, but I still like
horizontal. For starters, with a correctly run flow you are receiving the disc
in the center of the field, not on the sidelines. Even with no wind, the
possibility of turnover rises exponentially once the disc gets on the
sideline, and with some wind, that percentage gets even higher. Obviously, the
disc will eventually find its way to a sideline, but the frequency in which
that occurs goes down when flowing horizontally. I also believe (although I
know some don't) that throwing break-marks is actually easier in a horizontal,
as long as cutters standing on the break side keep potential poachers
occupied. And getting breaks going up-wind is huge for eating up chunks of
yardage and for allowing the possibility of a break-mark huck. Most likely
defenders will be fronting, and if you can get the disc to one of your big
throwers on that break side, bomb away.

When dealing with a crosswind, it is imperative that the disc gets to that
upwind side (i.e. the side that the wind is blowing from). Again, my bias will
be towards horizontal, because I think with a vertical (where the open spaces
are towards the outsides of the field) you will find yourself trapped on the
down-wind sideline more often that you would like.

The vertical stack is true to its name in that it attacks the field
vertically. This can be helpful when attacking up wind. For most windy games
O-lines will typically find themselves attacking down wind, while the d-lines
(provided they force turnovers) will be going up-wind. This means that a
team's less offensively talented players (usually) will be asked to score
given more difficult circumstances. In this case having an offense that relies
on numerous throws, dumps and swings significantly hurts that sides chances of
scoring. When attacking the upwind end zone with consistent 20+ MPH gusts, you
may want to go vertical. Having played on a team with a very big thrower, this
offense can be your best bet to actually get the disc down the field. Try
isolating your best deep threat for your biggest thrower and pull the trigger.
Obviously this won't work every time, but the chance of completing one longer
thrown is often higher than completing 15-20 shorter ones, depending on the
personnel. Without the threat of deep throws, defenses will sit on the unders
and make it nearly impossible to move the disc, unless your handlers can break
the mark consistently.

The windier it is, regardless of whether attacking upwind or downwind, but
especially upwind, the less likely you'll be to string together dozens of
passes to score. Often times the chances of completing one "risky" throw are
higher than completing 20+ "safe" throws. Take the shot when its there, even
if it doesn't pay off the defense will know you're willing to jack it, which
will allow for easier unders later in the game.

And, when attacking downwind with a 20+ MPH wind, never turn the disc within
your brick. It doesn't matter if the disc goes 80 yards out the back of your
opponent's end zone; make them go the full 70 yards to score.
