+++
issue = "001"
title = "Cater to Your Team's Particular Skills"
author = "Gwen Ambler"
date = "2008-05-20"
+++

Any offense is difficult in the wind, so when conditions are windy a team
should play the offense that it has practiced the most. Both vertical and
horizontal stack offenses have advantages and disadvantages in the wind and
the decision to play one over the other depends on how well your team can be
on the same page while running it's O.

When my team first made the transition from vertical stack to horizontal stack
back in 2005, we struggled in the wind and often would switch back to the vert
stack when it was windy and we were having difficulty scoring. However, that
was comparing a vertical stack offense at which we were very experienced to a
horizontal offense that we were just learning. At the time, I was convinced
that a vertical stack was better in the wind because the emphasis on the
lateral disc movement of dumping and swinging made it hard for the defense to
overplay the open side, allowing opportunities for cutters to get open with
timing and handlers to generate movement with break mark throws. It seemed to
me that defenses were able to easily front cutters in our horizontal stack
when it was windy and handlers were often left without many options.

As my team's horizontal stack has matured and become more dynamic, I now think
that it offers more possibilities to advance the disc confidently in windy
conditions than the vertical stack. A horizontal offense allows more
flexibility for handlers to aggressively attack and get the disc upfield. This
not only serves to catch downfield defenders out of position, but it also
provides an easy way to advance the disc down the field as the short throws
and dishy passes to handlers remain largely unaffected by wind. Additionally,
lots of handler motion combined with the coordinated movement of four cutters
filling and vacating multiple cutting lanes can find holes in a poaching
defense and isolate defenders without help deep. I have found vertical stack
offenses to be less effective at breaking down the poachy and clammy defenses
that wind invites.

While I would rather play a horizontal offense now, I recognize that its
strength lies in the complex combination of coordination and improvisation. I
think this may actually take longer for a team to practice before it can
effectively execute the offense in any condition than it does for a vertical
stack. However, the rewards are greater.
