+++
issue = "001"
title = "My Thoughts On The Stack Debate"
author = "Tully Beatty"
date = "2008-05-20"
+++

Given the chess game that's taking place, the O should be keeping the D on
their toes equally as much, so I don't know if it's a matter Of which type of
O I'd "rather" run. Considering the conditions are windy enough, I'd more than
likely prefer the Ho stack mainly because I'm thinking the D is coming zone or
zone for a certain number of passes. If the D looks to transition after 4/5/6
passes, the secondary outside players are already set in place. I also like to
look for a potential 2 to 3-man homey/dominator after the D's zone to man
transition.

I think the wind can be the D's 8th man if you're running a vertical stack
into the wind. Running a Ho stack is more effective because running dummy cuts
or fake cuts to the open side are more believable and the D can't necessarily
overplay the open side. Having the ability to opt for a 3-man homey after a
call/violation while facing the wind is "easier" when standing spread O rather
than in a stack; it's an easier transition for that matter. Downwind, I'd be
more flexible to run a vertical stack. In that situation the wind might become
the O's 8th man. Dropping a hammer to break side space downwind for example.
After feeling out the first few points in a heavy crosswind game, I'd be more
comfortable running a vertical stack. With the exception of your deep-deep in
a zone O, all the players are pretty much where they need to be. I'm sure
you'd be looking at a 1-3-3, a 4-man cup or some sort of heavy trap-side
defense for a few passes if not the entire point. That being true, I like
having players near to where you want them setup. Allow handlers to be
handlers for the first few passes. Maybe they can play a game of catch for the
first few passes before the transition; and if not then the wings can get
settled and a popper and handler/dump look for a potential 2 on 1 match-up.

Looking at that kind of wind with either offensive set, the main adjustment
I'm looking at is really not so different from a no-wind day: you don't need 7
players to score.

Upwind or downwind: at some point I'm looking for the opportunity to use
throwers and use speed/quickness to get closer to the end zone.
