+++
issue = "001"
title = "Vouching For the Vert Stack"
author = "Miranda Roth"
date = "2008-05-20"
+++

I guess I'm pretty old school on this one. One of the main advantages of the
horizontal offense is the deep space it affords throwers, particularly once
cutters get the disc in their hands. In a crosswind or upwind situation, deep
looks for any thrower become less of an option so I would prefer to run the
vertical stack. This usually gives the thrower multiple in looks and I find
the dump-swing to be much easier out of a vertical set. To me, dump-swing will
win you windy games just by advancing the disc a little bit each time on the
swing.

Now there are some special situations to be addressed here.

What if the disc is trapped on sideline toward which the wind is blowing? This
is a tough one. In this situation, the dump-swing is harder and it's even hard
to throw to an in cut. One thing to do is while using the dump swing; don't
swing it all the way to the sideline creating a trap situation. This also goes
for a similar weather situation when playing zone offense. Another thing to
consider, particularly in lower level games where more turnovers occur (and
particularly in really bad winds) is hucking and playing D.

What if you are going downwind? I actually really like running horizontal or
spread offenses in this situation because of the open deep space it creates.
Again, if you turn it over on deep looks (where more horizontal turns come),
the other team has to work it all the way up, into the wind.

What if you really want to run the horizontal offense/your team doesn't have a
vertical stack offense? My advice, much like in a vertical stack offense, is
to keep the stack closer to the handlers the windier it is. This forces the
defense to still respect deep looks and it also makes handlers' jobs easier
since they don't have to throw as far to get it to a cutter. On the other
hand, if your handlers are particularly strong, you might think about running
a handler dominated offense (the cutters wouldn't have to stack as close for
this) or at least initiate to a handler cutting up field and then to a cutter
on the second pass.
