+++
issue = "011"
title = "Downfield 1-On-1 Defense"
author = "Seth Wiggins"
date = "2008-11-20"
+++

You're downfield, the disc has stopped, and you're defending a cutter in the
middle of a flat stack. You'll need all the speed, agility, and strength you
have—long before the point begins you can better your odds by improving your
physical ability. Chances are if you are reading this you know how.  
  
Although Ultimate is a team game, the flat stack does a good job at isolating
one-on-one matchups. While switching and poaching can work against weaker
offensive teams, intelligent ones will be able to change the position of both
the disc and their cutters quicker than you can react, and will beat your
defense without much effort.  
  
You aren't reading this to figure out how to guard a one dimensional
player—the tall, fast runner who can't throw should be backed (defender closer
to the endzone then the disc), and the slow lilliputian thrower should be
fronted (defender closer to the disc than the endzone). What you should be
worried about are the athletes that can be effective either with the disc in
their hands or catching longer throws.  
  
So how do you defend them? Frankly, I don't know. After 4 years of club
ultimate, I have been beat one way or another by almost every single offensive
player. More will get their chance. I have however been taught a few basic
tips:  
  
**Understand probabilities:** A good team will complete all throws to open
cutters coming to the disc. These cuts average 10-15 yards, so 5-7 open cuts
will mean a goal. Throws to cutters going away from the disc bring a lower
completion percentage. Even though one long throw can equal the value of 7
short ones, the chance of a turnover is infinitely better than none. The trick
is determining what chance of completion a long throw has, and acting
accordingly.  
  
**Understand cutter's goals:** A cutter with one step separation from their
defender coming to the disc is open, however the same cutter with three steps
going away is covered. The cutter's differing definition of success should be
met with appropriate defensive goals of stopping cuts coming to the disc by
more that those going away.  
  
**Watch and match hips:** Your cutter's hips will tell you where they are
running, and yours should be positioned the same as theirs. When defending
your cutter, you need only react to changes of direction by the hips, and not
to arm, shoulder, or head fakes.  
  
**Know the location of the disc:** Your position relative to your defender's
should also be relative to the location of the disc. You have three
choices—watch both your defender and the disc, rely on sideline help to tell
you where it is, or (lightly) touch your defender and watch the disc.  
  
**Use your body:** It is possible at times to position your body in the path
of your cutter before they get there in order to prevent their desired
movement. This is particularly effective against cutters coming back to the
disc after running away. This is risky, as any cutter can use a overly close
defender to their advantage when expected. Never initiate contact.  
  
These might help. Remember, perfect offense beats perfect defense. The point
is to get as many blocks as possible, which is not the same as stopping every
play.
