+++
issue = "011"
title = "Three Keys To Being A Good Middle"
author = "Chelsea Putnam"
date = "2008-11-20"
+++

I can think of three main points that will help you when you are trying to get
open in the middle of a horizontal stack. The first is that your team needs to
put the right type of player in that position. In my opinion, this is a player
who is confident with the disc, is a threat as a deep thrower, and understands
how to get open both going deep and coming under. Having a player who is a
"threat" as a cutter and a thrower will make the defense have to decide what
they are going to take away and in doing so will leave more openings for you.  
  
Secondly, a player's job as a cutter in the middle of the horizontal stack is
to engage the defender. This is not a footrace, it is a matter of driving the
defender in one direction (my personal favorite is running directly at the
defender to get them on their heels and then exploding 90 degrees in either
direction). By getting your defender on their heels, even if they are faster
than you, you will have a momentary advantage. Also, you will create a better
cutting lane for yourself and make it easier to receive the disc. One of the
best pieces of advice I ever received is "the best in cut is an out cut" and
vise versa. By driving your defender in one direction it will open up a lane
for you in a different direction.  
  
The third point is that you need to remember the "shoulders square" rule. This
is the mentality that while cutting, you should have your shoulders facing
either directly at your thrower or the thrower should be seeing the back of
your jersey. By cutting in with your shoulders square, the width of your body
will be in front of your defender, which makes it hard to get a D, and you
will be able to move laterally to get to the disc. When cutting out, run in a
straight line out (you are fastest that way), check over your shoulder around
8-10 steps (to see if your thrower is still engaged with you), and then decide
where you need to go depending on the throw. Typically you will be at least
one step in front of your defender (because you knew where you were cutting
and they didn't), so after the disc is up you can adjust your position to make
the catch. Hopefully those points were helpful because one thing is for
sureâ€”horizontal stack is here to stay.
