+++
issue = "002"
title = "Answers To All Of These Questions"
author = "Tully Beatty"
date = "2008-05-28"
+++

**_Do young players have any chance of making the team as an offensive player?
What about as a handler? As a hucker? What would they have to show you to
prove their worth?_**  
  
Sure they do and it depends on their skill set. It's more than likely easier
for one to make it as a hucker first; pretty much everyone can huck it. Making
it as a primary handler (a "1") is somewhat tougher.  
  
**_Is calm, conservative play better? Or do you want to see highlight reel
moves, throws, and catches?_**  
  
I prefer a combination of the two which is possible, but most players can't
pull off the balancing act.  
  
Say you are a young player with a specialty throw (something out of the normal
repetoire). You are confident in that throw, but it doesn't really fit easily
into a team's offense (rather, they could change how they play to take
advantage of this talent). Should you show this in tryout scrimmages?  
  
I think so but obviously not all the time and on those turns your defense has
to be prettier than your offense was ugly.  
  
**_What is most important: practices or tournaments?_**  
  
That's not quite a quick answer like the others; but I'll go with practice.
Tournaments are the luxury.  
  
**_How should tryouts behave and carry themselves? Some captains and coaches
love people that ask a ton of questions, and others want people that want a
lot of feedback. Or give their opinions. Or are silent, strong teammates. What
are you looking for? Does the personality of a player figure large into
whether they can make the team? What about an obnoxious player with tremendous
talent?_**  
  
Tryouts should be determined, with a feel of confidence about them. They
should be putting out there what they think the last 10% of 100% is. That
measure has never failed me in the past when critiquing others/tryouts. It's
probably a collective thinking among those tryouts, in their drive to the
site: "I'm gonna give these guys 100% today." Okay, great; but what's that
last 10% mean to you? What am I looking for? I'm looking for the casual
approach or an approach that's mostly callow.  
  
If personality mattered, or mattered greatly, there'd be a great many savage
seven squads out there. Aren't most tremendously talented players obnoxious?
For those that fit that description as a tryout, I think that's part of their
talent and it's something they can work on over the long haul of the season if
they survive the cut. And of course this comes down to personnel management
and is one of the reason why being a captain can be so damned thankless.  
  
**_For your team, does everyone try out, or are returning players safe? How
long are your tryouts? Is this optimal? Is there anything about the tryout
process that you think teams should do more often?_**  
  
Up until a few season ago, returning players were safe on the team that I
competed for. It may have been 2006 when returners had to actually make the
team. Funny how some decide to play coed when the word gets out. Tryouts
usually run once a week for three weeks; but there's also a weekly pickup or
competitive scrimmage during this time as well. Also, there's an early
tournament, such as terminus where interested tryouts are invited.  
  
It's difficult because of the tourney calendar, but good club teams should
make themselves available to college teams early in the semester: provide
clinics to teams within their section. 2 or 3 times early in the semester to
accommodate all the teams is what I'm thinking. I know it'd be tough because
of all the tournaments, but at least some of the second tier teams could
attend, they have ballers too.
