+++
issue = "002"
title = "Focus On What You Can Control"
author = "Ryan Morgan"
date = "2008-05-28"
+++

Trying out for a club team is like interviewing for any job. There are some
things that are in your control and some things that aren’t. It’s important to
focus on the things you can control and understand that the other things
aren’t worth worrying about. Even if you are a great thrower, if the team
already has great throwers then the 6’9" guy that can’t throw may get selected
over you. Here, I’d like to focus on three things that I would like to see
from all of my tryouts, regardless of my team’s needs: commitment, willingness
to adapt, and decision making.  
  
First, for a tryout to have any chance of making the team he must show his
commitment. Elite club ultimate requires a significant time and money
commitment. Additionally, a newcomer to the team will require more time during
the season to gel with his new teammates. A tryout should show that he is
prepared to make the requisite commitment by attending all preseason tryout
events. This may require missing family events, having less time to study for
a test, or delaying that vacation but an elite club player must make the team
a priority. A tryout who misses preseason events severely disadvantages
himself.  
  
Second, a tryout must show a willingness to adapt to the team’s style. Just
because you had the green light to send it in your former team’s huck-n-hope
offense doesn’t mean you will have the same luxury with this team. Get a feel
for what kind of offense or defense the team is accustomed to running and show
you can be an asset in that system. A good rule of thumb is not to try
anything unusual unless an established player does it first. Generally
speaking, don’t be the first tryout to attempt a 40-yard hammer or a blade to
the break side. If you are comfortable with a special throw, show it off
during warm-ups and not in-game. Perhaps over the season improvements can be
made to the system to take advantage of your skills. But for the tryout period
you should adapt your play to the team. The team should not adapt to you. Of
course, if you find out that this team plays huck-n-hope too, then huck away!  
  
Third, every tryout must demonstrate good decision-making. At the elite level
every possession matters. Every turnover matters. So, good decision-making
that will reduce turnovers is a much more important factor than at lower
levels. Sometimes knowing how to play smart is a more important quality that
being talented. On my team, a talented player that makes poor decisions will
get cut while a less talented player that makes good decisions has a much
better shot at making the team. Some examples of good decision-making include:  
  

  * Seeing poaches
  * Recognizing mismatches
  * Throwing high percentage passes but knowing when to take calculated risks
  * Appropriately choosing to initiate or not initiate a fast break after a turnover
  * Remaining calm even as the stall count gets high
  

Ultimately, both sides are trying to find the perfect fit for them. As a
tryout, as long as you focus on those things you can control including
commitment, a willingness to adapt, and good decision making, then you can
feel good about your effort. Good luck!
