+++
issue = "002"
title = "Go After Similar, More Experienced Players"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2008-05-28"
+++

I think the first thing that a player should evaluate is their own talents and
strengths. During the tryout you should be focusing on accentuating those
strengths when given the chance. If you're a tall deep threat, don't waste
time in a scrimmage squirelling around the disc, and in any huck drill make
sure you are going up strong to show that you can climb. If you're a squirrely
quick guy, make sure you are getting open on all short cuts, and that if there
are any sprints to be done that you are winning them all. And with these
points in mind, here are a few general tips:  
  
**Stay focused.** A few lazy turnovers in a seemingly meaningless drill might
cause the powers-that-be to write you off or at least notice and inconsistency
or lack of focus to detail. That's probably not going to be appreciated on a
successful team.  
  
**Give a good effort.** It might not be how the 'cool' guys play, or even very
efficient, but if you're going hard the people will notice, and that's always
a welcome vibe to bring to a team. Never give up on a disc that's in the air,
make every cut as hard as possible, make the guy you're guarding in the drill
work a little harder...it's a positive.  
  
**Recognize your strengths** and make sure they are exposed in scrimmages. if
you're going to make the team you're going to have to be pretty good at
something. know what that is, and make sure you're doing it better than
others.  
  
**Guard the returners** who do your thing as often as possible. If you can do
their thing better than them, that's going to be apparent if you are guarding
them. If you're making them work harder than usual, that will get filtered up
to decision-makers. If you're getting schooled, you'll at least know why you
didn't make the team and will have hopefully learned something from a better
player than you.  
  
**Finally, be supportive and enthusiastic.** All players love to get high-
fives from teammates, they love when people get excited about their defense,
when people recognize their accomplishments...don't be sparing with those
comments. Also, talk while your team is on defense, even if it's just to one
returner.  
  
I think it's important to recognize that there most likely is some hierarchy,
even a subtle one, and that returners are likely above new tryouts. Some teams
may have a flatter structure than others, but if you want to get on the team
you're likely going to have to displace somebody, so do all the things you can
better than some of those above you and hope that the effort and skill are
recognized.
