+++
issue = "002"
title = "Hard Work Stands Out"
author = "Miranda Roth"
date = "2008-05-28"
+++

At tryouts, I am looking for someone who will fit into the TOP HALF of our
roster if they are a new player. I prefer having all-team tryouts so that each
member, even if they have played on the team previously, brings great
intensity to tryouts — this is the best way to start a season (and the most
fair way to choose a team).  
  
In terms of skills, this means you need to have all the basics without flaw.
For example, you can be the best thrower in the world, but if you refuse to
play defense, ta-ta. As a teammate, I’m looking for someone who will support
the team, make the (huge) commitment to being at everything possible and be
low-maintenance. It’s good to ask questions; it’s bad to ask questions every
day of the same person. It’s also good to have a compatible personality —
someone that people will enjoy being around has a much greater chance of
making the team because we spend so much time together.  
  
As far as age, I’m more looking at someone who will either contribute to the
team immediately, and hopefully for more than one year OR someone who will
learn quickly and has a lot of potential (these are usually the hyper athletes
with weaker throws). In my mind, it’s great to be young and want to learn — if
this is you, make sure you show the appropriate amount of respect for team
captains/coaches/returning players. Young players can make the team as whoever
they are, age doesn’t matter that much to me — we have had very experienced,
calm young players play great in big games on Riot.  
  
As far as what type of play is better — I believe the base should be to be
100% on offense and never let your woman touch the disc on defense. Beyond
that, if you can break the mark, throw hucks, sky people, get blocks — show
that! But if one of those things isn’t you (they are almost certainly not ALL
you), tryouts is NOT the time to start trying. If you are particularly good at
something that the team you’re trying out for does not have, make sure you
show that at some point during the tryout process.  
  
I would say the #1 thing I’m looking for in a tryout is someone who works
hard. If you work hard every moment of your tryout that will stand out to
anyone. Whether you’re at tournaments, practices or track workouts, you better
be giving it your all at all times. This includes traits like being on
time/early to everything, busting your ass at track (and also having been at
the track/weight room prior to tryouts), being healthy for the tryout whenever
possible, jogging to water, making eye contact with people explaining
drills/offense/etc, and talking from the sideline at tournaments and
practices.
