+++
issue = "002"
title = "Thoughts from Chris Ashbrook"
author = "Chris Ashbrook"
date = "2008-05-28"
+++

**_Do young players have any chance of making the team as an offensive
player?_**  
  
Absolutely. There are a number of college players that have now played on club
teams while still in college (Watson, Heijman, Cahill, Gibson, etc), some
while in high school. These players are usually the best offensive players on
their teams and have been to college nationals, at least once, if not multiple
times. Although they may have inexperience on the club seen, they have crunch
time experience and are able to eventually translate that to the club scene.  
  
**_What about as a handler? As a hucker? What would they have to show you to
prove their worth?_**  
  
If you are a handler, you must be composed and make the right throw. This
means understanding what the offense is trying to accomplish and what your
role is in accomplishing this goal. Upon understanding the goal, the second
part is to actually make the decision to make the throw that completes the
goal of your offense. Finally, the handler should know the throws in their
repertoire.  
  
Understanding what the offense is trying to accomplish and your role to me is
key. By understanding the offense, you are able to position yourself for the
dump cut (or any cut) that will allow the thrower to make an easy completion
and retain the disc. After receiving the disc, this means that you know where
other people will be cutting so that you can keep the disc moving to your big
throwers.  
  
When watching handlers, I am ok with turnovers during tryouts when the handler
made the the throw easy for the person with the disc and subsequently made the
right decision in where to throw the disc. Sometimes the throw isn't complete,
it happens to everyone. However, if the throw is habitually not completed,
catching the disc and making the right decision will take you only so far in
the tryout process.  
  
What I am not ok with is:  

  1. When the handler looks off a throw that should have been made within the frame of the receiver; or
  2. Tries a throw that is not in their repertoire (even if completed). This shows to me a lack of confidence in their throwing ability, not understanding the offense, and/or lack of decision-making abilities.

For a hucker, this is usually a down field player. They need to have the
ability to gain yards and time their cuts. More importantly, they must be able
to make a consistently good choice and throw.  
  
Note, not every huck is a good huck. This should be made known to the hucker
and if they continue to make hucks that are low percentage as they fall out of
the framework of your offense, they may not make the team.  
  
**_Is calm, conservative play better? Or do you want to see highlight reel
moves, throws, and catches?_**  
  
I want to see the player play to the best of his skills, abilities, and within
the framework of the offense. The highlight reel plays will be a byproduct of
doing so.  
  
**_Say you are a young player with a specialty throw (something out of
thenormal repertoire). You are confident in that throw, but it doesn't really
fit easily into a team's offense (rather, they could change how they play to
take advantage of this talent). Should you show this in tryout scrimmages?_**  
  
I would recommend throwing it only when the situation dictates. To throw it in
any other circumstance, most likely will be a very low percentage throw and
probably be looked down upon. However, if you are able to identify the
situations in which the throw is highly effective and has a high completion
percentage I would be looking for a way to implement it only in certain
circumstances (such as a stopped disc).  
  
**_What is most important; practices or tournaments?_**  
  
Practices are more important. Here the captains are able to explain and work
on the skills that are important to their offensive and defensive and
philosophies. This gives the captains the opportunity to view which players
can and will fit into their style of play. It also gives them the opportunity
to identify the weaknesses of the tryouts within their structure.  
  
The tournament should be more of a confirmation that the player either is
capable, or is incapable of performing their role on the team.  
  
**_How should tryouts behave and carry themselves? Some captains and coaches
love people that ask a ton of questions, and others want people that want a
lot of feedback. Or give their opinions. Or are silent, strong teammates. What
are you looking for? Does the personality of a player figure large into
whether they can make the team? What about an obnoxious player with tremendous
talent?_**  
  
Always ask questions, always ask for feedback. Most of the captains I know are
more than willing to provide that feedback.  
  
In ultimate, I have found that personalities always figure into whether or not
the player makes the team. Two players of equal talent, the one who fits in
personality wise with the team will most likely make it over someone that does
not fit in well personality wise.  
  
**_Does everyone try out, or are returning players safe?_**  
  
On every team, you know pretty much that the top 10 (or possibly more) will be
returning. So it is then up to the captains to let those players who are on
the bubble know and tell them what they need to do to make the team.  
  
In general, when evaluating the bottom half of the roster, the question I ask
is whether or not the tryout would significantly improve the team over a
returning player. If the answer is no, then the returner will most likely
retain his spot. The reason for this is that the returner has history with the
team, understands the offense, defense, and his role on the team. There are a
number of intangibles the returner could possibly bring back. But there is
always the flip side, so you can never take your position on the team as a
returner for granted.  
  
**_How long are your tryouts? Is this optimal?_**  
  
6 - 8 practices and includes a tournament so that you can confirm your
thoughts on the player.  
  
**_Is there anything about the tryout process that you think teams should do
more often?_**  
  
During the tryout process I would like to see teams work on the basic skillset
of their tryouts (and their current players included). Then work the skillset
into their offensive and defensive philosophies. This allows you to identify
areas in which the players excel and where they are lacking.  
  
For instance, you might run a hucking drill to see who can actually huck with
consistency. You would then explain how the huck drill fits into your
offensive philosophy and the types of looks you want to take. This allows you
to identify those who can huck, then actually huck in the framework of your
offense during scrimmages and tournaments (confirmation) successfully.
