+++
issue = "002"
title = "Thoughts From Team USA Tryouts"
author = "Ben Van Heuvelen"
date = "2008-05-28"
+++

My thoughts on this topic are at the front of my mind today!  
  
Advice to tryouts:  
  
1\. Distinguish yourself on defense, even if you consider yourself an
offensive player. Even if you don't know the offensive system of the new team,
you can always make an impression on D. In particular, focus on marks and
shut-down defense.  
  
Be the defender who uses intelligence, positioning, and quickness to prevent
his guy from getting open for uncontested passes. Be the defender who visibly
hassles/ flusters the thrower with unpredictable movement and energy on the
mark. Do not go for poach Ds; do not go for handblocks at the expense of
letting off breakmark throws; do not bait layout Ds. Handblocks and layout Ds
are flashy, but good captains/coaches will appreciate the flawless
fundamentals that make for excellent team defense. (Also, flawless fundamental
defense should create plenty of opportunities for flashy big plays.)  
  
2\. Get in shape early. Returning players who feel more assured of their
roster spots might not be in great shape yet. You can get an extra few blocks
per game, catch an extra few goals per scrimmage, if you're in mid-season
shape when everyone else is in early-season shape.  
  
3\. Ask the captains/coaches what they're looking for. Good leaders will
articulate, or will be able to articulate, the general qualities they're
looking for in players. After a day or so of tryouts, they'll also be able to
tell you the type of specific role they envision for you, and what they need
to see from you in order to give you a spot on the team.  
  
4\. Play your game and show your skills, but within the structure and the
expectations that the team captains set. One way to achieve this balance is to
focus on being a player who makes everyone else better. Make throwers look
good by catching their swill. Make cutters look good by placing perfect passes
to space in front of them (and holstering throws that will not result in
perfect passes). Make teammates look good by clearing space. In the course of
doing all of these things, you will probably be doing flashy things -- making
plays as a receiver, breaking the mark, making long throws. The trick is to
keep your focus on doing what makes the team look good, rather than what makes
you look good. (Ultimately, they are one and the same.)  
  
5\. Cheer your fellow tryouts as if they're your teammates. One mental pitfall
of tryouts is that you focus relentlessly on yourself. You are constantly
evaluating how well you're doing. This is dangerous psychological territory.
(As Joe Montana said, "As soon as you know you're in The Zone, you're not in
The Zone.") Take your focus off yourself -- get out of your own head -- by
encouraging your fellow tryouts. Talk to them when they're marking,
congratulate them when they do good things, etc. (And, as a side-note, do not
try to coach or instruct them.) Not only will you have an easier time getting
out of your own head and play better, but you'll show the team leaders that
you're a good teammate.
