+++
issue = "029"
title = "Play A Different Position"
author = "Ted Munter"
date = "2010-05-25"
+++

I would argue that field vision, like speed or height, is pretty hard to teach
and learn. The best athletes don't see what's happening so much as take a
picture of the field and respond. A few brains can do that kind of thing, but
most can't. Bill Rodriguez would counsel deeps in a zone to move up if they
saw seven opposing players in front of them. Super, if, like Bill, you can see
them all at once and count them at the same time. But of course something
comes with seeing patterns. A player who comes to Ultimate late, after playing
years of soccer, will probably have a better feel for the game than a cross-
country runner. One of the best first year players I ever saw had been a
quarterback. With no one trying to kill him every three seconds, ten seconds
seemed like plenty of time to survey and throw.  
  
Three suggestions to getting better:  
  
**1) Play a different position.** Seems obvious, but do it. In that zone or on
offense, find a different spot. You will see the game differently and that
helps. Famously, Bill Russell ran every Celtics play from every position, not
just his own.  
  
**2) Play some scrimmages with different parameters:** A shorter or narrower
field, a shorter stall, six on seven.  
  
**3) Find a way of trying things you know are never gonna work.** "After he
throws a swing I am going to stand in the lane and watch as I count "one, two"
and look around. Yeah, my guy may go score, but I am seeing what happens. If
your team allows for such scrimmages (and for more sensible versions of what I
am suggesting) you may be able to develop a better sense of "go now" or "don't
wait," which is really all we are talking about.
