+++
issue = "029"
title = "Understanding The Information"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2010-05-25"
+++

Understanding positioning and distribution of players on the field is an
important skill, but also somewhat of an innate ability. How this skill
manifests itself is sometimes subtle and other times overt. It can show up in
the guy who always seems to be making the good cut to keep the offensive flow
going or in the physically ungifted player who consistently finds themselves
alone in the endzone. It can be the thrower who is able to find targets on the
goal line or the defender who gets a lot of poach blocks. It can be the
popper/wing in zone offense who is always touching the disc or the defensive
wing whose side the disc never advances on. All these traits come from someone
understanding the space around them and where the players on the field are
moving.  
  
I was watching a Division I basketball practice once when a player made a
mistake and the coach, rather than ripping into him, asked the player what he
saw when he made that decision. By understanding the information that the
player was working with, he was better able to instruct the player. This
questioning is something that every player should endure, and at least ask
themselves, whenever a mistake is made. Did I recognize that poach in the
lane? Did I understand the balance of players on the field? Where was the open
space for me to cut to? Did I need to protect against my receiver going deep
when he was already 50 yards away from the disc? Of course, these questions
only deal with the perceived information, rather than what may have actually
happened, but it is a good starting place.  
  
Developing field vision, or field sense, is a difficult thing, and requires
acute awareness of the other 13 players on the field, even while being
involved in the play. One thing that a thrower can do in a practice
environment is to throw the disc to the place where he sees the space, even if
there is nobody cutting there. By making this throw, it becomes obvious where
he is looking, and where he sees the space on the field. Cutters can also draw
attention by yelling at the thrower to alert him to where he should be
looking. Both these examples deal with one-to-one or one-to-few player
interactions. Developing this in a one-to-many or many-to-many fashion is more
difficult. There are some drills where a player turns to see a selection of
cutters, some which are marked, and others which are unmarked, and has to
recognize which players are open. This drill deals more with recognition of
cutters, rather than using space, but hopefully through this recognition, a
deeper level of identifying open cutters can be achieved. Another situation
may be where players close their eyes and then open them as the disc becomes
active; they have to quickly get a sense of the balance of players on the
field and where they should be moving, recognizing who should be cutting, or
what lanes need to be plugged before resuming the offensive/defensive plan.
