+++
issue = "029"
title = "Yeah Iverson, We've Talkin' About Practice"
author = "Ryan Morgan"
date = "2010-05-25"
+++

I have a rather painful childhood memory from back in middle school. I was
playing basketball and went to set a low screen for another player. In a
moment of miscommunication both my defender and the player who I set a pick on
rushed to guard my teammate. I was left open for just a few seconds, but
before I realized it, the basketball hit me in the face. The point guard
recognized that I was about to be open and passed the ball early. I remember
appreciating two lessons learned from that moment. First, always keep your
head up so you don't get hit in the face unexpectedly. Second, and far more
importantly, if you keep your head up you can take advantage of narrow windows
of opportunity. This second lesson is field vision.  
  
Like many Ultimate players, I can trace my field vision skills to non-Ultimate
sports like basketball and soccer. These taught me to move without the ball,
respond to a teammate's positioning and see open passing lanes. After lots of
practice one learns to pick up on tiny cues on the field from which one can
anticipate what will happen next. The hours of practice that give a basketball
player the field vision to use no-look passes are the same hours of practice
that give a handler the field vision to throw to a cutter that isn't open yet.
In both cases, field vision is a matter of picking up on and taking advantage
of tiny cues. In both cases, the only way to learn those cues is through hours
of practice.  
  
Sure, some field vision skills from non-Ultimate sports translate to Ultimate.
A brand new Ultimate player with a soccer or lacrosse background will
generally have less trouble adjusting to the pace and movement of Ultimate
than a brand new player with only a golf background. But just like learning to
throw a flick, transferring field vision skills to Ultimate requires practice.
I remember my first few weeks playing Ultimate in college when, because of my
soccer background, standing in a tight stack in the middle of the field felt
so unnatural. I wanted to spread out like in soccer. As a rookie who couldn't
throw further than 15 feet, I was pegged as a cutter and continued to struggle
with the stack concept until one practice where we were randomly assigned
different roles. I got to be a handler, and though I still couldn't throw, I
could see where I wanted to throw. That's when the stack concept started to
make more sense to me. All it took was seeing the field from a different
perspective.  
  
I think the way to teach field vision, if it can be taught, is to give players
the opportunity to see the field from a different perspective, or a different
angle, than they are used to. If the player is a cutter, make the player spend
some time handling. If the player is a defender, make the player spend some
time on the offensive team. If the player is a deep-deep in a zone defense,
make the player play in the cup. Seeing the field from different positions
helps you hone field vision because you learn the little cues that allow you
to anticipate what will happen next. All it takes is practice.
