+++
issue = "007"
title = "Redistribute Their Resources"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2008-08-12"
+++

I believe that it is impossible to design a zone (or any defense for that
matter) that takes away everything. If I knew that zone I would never lose a
game. I think the important thing about a zone is to make sure that everyone
is clear of what the zone's objectives are, and when they are forced to make a
decision on the field, they do it within the context of that zone.  
  
For instance, there might be a zone that encourages the other team to move
side-to-side, swinging the disc but is stingy about the upfield. There might
be another that really plugs up the short stuff and forces a huck. The defense
only has a limited amount of resources (defenders) and so you have to decide
how to distribute those resources throughout the field. The best zone is one
that all the players understand and run well together.  
  
The zone I would choose would depend somewhat on the other team's strengths,
but also on the best zone in our team's arsenal. Typically this has been a
zone which puts resources up front, at the expense of fewer people helping on
deep hucks. We might allow the disc to move side-to-side, even for short
yards, but primarily stopping mid-range (10-20 yards) shots directly up field
to receivers. Hopefully frustration will set in and the offense will decide to
let one go on an ill-advised deep shot that we have a good chance at pulling
down. If there is a bit of tricky wind, we may even get lucky with a
relatively unforced error, brought on by the fact that the offense is throwing
a lot of safe passes.  
  
Patient offenses may be able to wear the defense down and chip away up the
field to score, or even exploit a seam and then have an advantage behind the
defense (again, with resources put forward if the disc gets behind the wings
there is a lot of open space). A good team should have a zone to complement
their bread and butter, one which redistributes those resources on the field
to take away something else. Typically though, if there is one position which
could be easily adjusted to take away a different option it is the mark. By
making the mark tighter/looser or having him shift to prevent/allow a swing
the defense can take a different shape with some ease.
