+++
issue = "007"
title = "The Four-Person Cup"
author = "Miranda Roth"
date = "2008-08-12"
+++

For most of my teams (coaching and playing) we have been most comfortable in a
4-person cup recently. The goal with this zone is to prevent throws through
the cup or around it with yardage gainers—we want to force the throws backward
and we want to force a lot of them. I was taught to see this as a math
problem—even the simplest throw will only be completed 99% of the time (.99
possibility of completion). Two of these same passes will be completed .99*.99
times (.9801 possibility of completing both passes). So you can easily see
that with more passes, the chance of turnovers increases and, of course, if
you or the conditions are forcing more difficult throws the completion rate
for each pass goes down which translates to an increase in chance of turnover
(i.e. the same throw on a windy/rainy day is only .8 possibility of
completion).  
  
In addition to the math, I feel very comfortable with this zone with the
personnel that I've had on my recent teams—lots of tall people with strong
marks that are difficult to throw over. Sometimes we also run a variation of
this in the 1-3-3 trapping zone that forces the same looks as the 4-person
cup, but also encourages the disc to go toward typically weaker throwers (side
poppers/wings instead of primary handlers) in a trap situation.  
  
In both of these zones, the weak points are always creating numbers advantages
behind the cup/1-3. If two handlers can easily break it through a 4-person
cup, then there is a 5 on 3 downfield advantage for the offense. If this
happens, then we typically transition out immediately (on a yardage-gaining
break), or after it happens more than once (on short breaks).  
  
From a team-wide standpoint, the adjustments that we like to make after teams
start breaking through this is to transition to a similar but different
zone—dropping one of the cuppers back into a very short short-deep position if
they are gaining from short breaks or perhaps a box-and-one if one handler in
particular is breaking through the zone repeatedly.  
  
Often times the positions that have to work the hardest and need the most
feedback in both of my favorite zones are the wings—they are in charge of
covering the most field and based on the offense we are playing against they
will get very different looks. I think that the wings in the zone can make or
break the defense—making it with hustle, communication, and awareness.
