+++
issue = "007"
title = "What Should We Contain?"
author = "Jeff Eastham-Anderson"
date = "2008-08-12"
+++

**Zone Basics**  
I've always been a fan of a good trapping zone, but in unpredictable winds
even a very conservative and basic zone would produce turns. There are way too
many specifics and permutations to cover in this forum, but below are three
principles of a trapping zone.  
  
Basically, a trapping zone consists of three things. First, how are you going
to allow the disc to move to a sideline. This is a combination of making it
hard to move the disc in the middle, and making a lateral throw an easy pass
without giving up too many yards.  
  
Second, how are you going to apply pressure once you are on the sideline. This
typically involves shifting the cup to take away easy dumps, and shifting the
remaining downfield defenders to the strong side so that the only remaining
options are a short pass that looses yardage, or a long throw over many
defenders to the weak side.  
  
Finally, how are you going to contain when the disc moves off sideline or
downfield. A lateral throw can often be contained, but everyone needs to react
and take away the next throw, and not the one that was just thrown. For
downfield throws, the deep and wings can often be most effective by just
covering a person, instead of an area. The primary goal is to prevent other
downfield passes, then re-establish containment with zone coverage.  
  
**Adjustments**  
One adjustment would be to have a zone-to-man transition, or just run man a
couple points. Once a team starts to figure a zone out, they will gain
confidence through repetition. The easiest way to counter this is to give them
and entirely different look for a few points. Unless you have an entirely
different zone set, this usually means a zone to man transition, or just man
for the entire point.  
  
**If you had only enough time in one time-out to talk to a single player in
your zone D, which position would that be? What might you tell them to
adjust?**  
The best person to talk to would be the short deep, or whoever the defender is
that is right behind the cup. Most zones get hosed when the disc moves to the
place you least want it to move. For a trapping zone this is upfield when it
is in the middle, or across the entire field when it is trapped. The former is
really the short deep's responsibility, as he is in the best position to
joystick the cup defenders whose main objective is to make a wall and deny the
middle of the field. Again, there are so many permutations, but essentially
you will need to adjust your positioning to take away more of the middle,
while giving the offense more of an opportunity to move laterally.
