+++
issue = "026"
title = "Rotate 90Â°"
author = "Peri Kurshan"
date = "2010-03-16"
+++

The anti-reset mark can effectively make the backfield dump a very difficult
throw. Here are a few ways to prevent this defense from making your life as a
thrower difficult.  
  
First of all, the D is most effective on a high stall count when you are
running out of time and options (and many teams will only shift their marks to
take away the dump once the stall count gets high). Looking to your resetter
very early lessens the chance that the anti-reset mark will be set in the
first place. In a similar vein, faking and pivoting early and aggressively
will make it less likely that your mark can tell when you're actually looking
for the reset.  
  
If you do find yourself with an anti-reset mark and a dump that's covered up
the line, there's a simple trick that you can use to make your remaining
options seem much less daunting: turn your back to the sideline and then
mentally rotate the field 90 degrees so that you now imagine your endzone of
attack to be in the direction you are facing. The mark will now be a regular
angled, force one-way mark, and the person at the front of the stack is now
standing in the open side lane.  
  
Chances are their defender may not have adjusted to the mark opening up your
options to hit that front of the stack player. Make sure your reset handler
and their defender stay out of the way, preferably by staying back for the
dump so that the mark continues to force the same way. The front of the stack
player is now in a good position to either make a cut on what is now the open
side, or even better, simply wait for you to put a pass out straight in front
of you for them to run onto. From the perspective of what the real field
actually looks like, this pass will be a cross-field pass into the middle of
the field. With a little bit of float on that throw, you can put it out in
front of your target such that they run onto it with momentum towards the
break side of the field, and their mark trailing them on the open side- great
opportunity to a continuation yardage cut on the break side!
