+++
issue = "018"
title = "Effective Practice For Zone"
author = "Miranda Roth"
date = "2009-05-12"
+++

Zone offense is very difficult to simulate in practice. The skills necessary
for zone are often quite different than for man (offense and defense). For
zone O, you need to practice vision, patience and confidence which are quite
difficult to simulate. For the most part, we usually teach zone O by drawing
it up on a white board, going over it on the field and then doing LOTS of
5/10-pulls sometimes stopping the point to reposition people, especially in
the early parts of the year. Handlers can simulate zone offense by playing
against different types of partial defenses (3-person or 4-person cups, box
and 1, etc.) in small sided games where they just try to advance the disc.
Poppers can be added to increase the reality factor in these small-sided games
(we often play 5 on 3 or 4).  
  
I prefer having 2 handlers attack 4-person cups and 3 attack 3-person cups.
This is not to say that they can't both work for both defenses, but 2 handlers
can easily attack the middle (where the weakness is in 4-person cups) and 3
can more easily and quickly swing to attack the sides which tend to be weaker
in 3-person cups. Handlers and poppers should be the first to realize what
type of zone is being played and can thus most easily adjust to the formation.  
  
Deeps in zone offense tend to hang out and wait for things to happen around
them. To a certain extent this is trueâ€”they should never just move around
blindly. However, deep movement can not only open throws to these deep
cutters, but can make poppers' lives much easier by drawing short-deep and
deep-deep defenders away from their space. Deep cutters should try to make the
deep deep choose between them by staying in or out and staying left or right.
They should definitely switch based on where the disc is and make real cuts
but they should never be on the same side of the field or both be under/deep.
