+++
issue = "018"
title = "The Jailbreak"
author = "Charlie Reznikoff"
date = "2009-05-12"
+++

For most zones, the vulnerable spot is ten yards behind the cup (or front
wall). To get there you can go through the cup, over the cup, or around the
cup. Through and over involve risk. Around requires patience and planned cuts.
Ideally after the swing, before the cup is reset, the handler has two cutters
available for the next throw, one a continuation to the line and the other a
throw to the middle. Most zones will stop the continuation, force you to throw
back to the middle, and hope the cup will get there to stop or defend that
throw. As the cup tires, the window for throws to the middle opens. Once the
disc is behind the cup, that player (a popper) should have continuation cuts
to the middle of the field. These come from the other popper or the wings. Any
reasonable throw, even for a minimal gain, should be thrown. Each throw forces
the scrambling defense to readjust yet again. The throw to the middle, and the
resulting jailbreak, is the most desirable outcome of the swing, and the best
way to beat a zone.  
  
If offensive players hang out too deep, they will miss the continuation cut
after the swing, and more importantly, they will miss the jailbreak. If these
players stay nearer to the disc, they will draw the deep defender in and, when
the jail break happens, a cutter can blow by the deep D for an easier huck.  
  
I would practice zone starting with a swing and with the cup out of position.
Practice splitting the D after the swing and flooding the middle. This will
help your offense learn to coordinate their jailbreaks and also teach the
defense to recover after a swing.
