+++
issue = "004"
title = "A Progression Of Thoughts"
author = "Jonathan Potts"
date = "2008-06-17"
+++

It seems sensible to find the disc as early as possible. However, I think
first I need to make sure I'm matching the receiver stride for stride, so I
let them do the work of finding the disc early on and use that time to make up
some ground.  
  
Any work they do finding the disc will also help me pinpoint where to look for
it. Once I'm matching their stride, I'll look for the disc and start making
judgments about how the contest is going to pan out  
  
If it's a leading pass, I just need to put my head down and try to get between
the receiver and the disc, as close to the receiver as possible, and
preferably with a decent jump. If I can establish a better line than them,
I'll try to do that. Realistically, my high layouts are pretty ineffectual and
injury-creating, but I've seen some great high blocks from layouts, so go for
it if it's your thing.  
  
If it's a floating pass, I would usually approach the bid from behind the
receiver. If the receiver needs to back up, I probably try to establish
position early to stop them backing up (but beware other receivers coming in
for scraps!). If the receiver has good position, I try to stay out and get in
a well-timed maximal jump at speed while they're standing flat-footed under
the disc. If the cut is from the break side, it generally means there's a bit
more room for negotiating position, so it pays to find the disc early and
establish the best line at the disc.  
  
If they have a height advantage, I'll try to establish position early and stop
them getting a play on the disc. If I have a height advantage, I'll try to
just find the place where I can bid for it at close to maximum jump and bid
for it there, assuming they can't bid in the same place. But I want to
minimise the risk of it going over my head and giving them a cheap win, so I
include a bit of a margin of error in choosing that spot. So it helps to know
if someone is short with big hops.  
  
If it's a leading pass and they have a speed advantage, as they spike it in my
face I probably turn around and start abusing the marker for letting out a
clean huck.
