+++
issue = "003"
title = "Make The Offense Uncomfortable"
author = "Nancy Sun"
date = "2008-06-03"
+++

Adjustments made before during a game can win...or lose a game. Pre-game
scouting reports or prior encounters can give clues for how each team's
offense and defense should come out of the gate. However, there is no
substitute for actually playing the game and making real-time evaluations.
There is a fine line to walk between jumping the gun on an adjustment and not
acting soon enough and I think that one of the hardest jobs of a team
strategist is this evaluation and subsequent decision for adjustment or non-
adjustment.  
  
In the given situation, it sounds like the defense tried to take away the
opponents first option (banking on a low likelihood of being beat on the
opponent's second or subsequent option), but the opponent made an effective
pre-game adjustment, and kudos to them. Halftime is a natural time for
adjustments to be made to happen and in this particular situation, I would
absolutely change up the defensive plan.  
  
In close games, teams trade points, teams take turns going on runs, and at the
most basic level, teams settle into a rhythm. One of the goals of a defense
should be to make the offense uncomfortable, and clearly the opposing team is
feeling pretty at ease with their star thrower being forced away from the
disc. The decision for whether the defensive adjustment is a zone, clam, a
straight up mark, backing man defense, etc., should be made with your team's
strengths (and other external factors, like weather) in consideration. If the
decision is to stay with man defense, the other factor to consider is the type
of defender to put on the thrower. For example, on other team's big throwers,
there can be much success to be had with rotating smaller-in-stature handler
defenders who specialize in challenging the dump pass with more physical
defenders who cover and hold lots of ground on D and provide a huge mark.  
  
Whichever method ends up being chosen, the goal with the defensive adjustement
should be to disrupt the offense's rhythm enough to get a couple turns (and
defensive scores) and shift the momentum of the game.
