+++
issue = "003"
title = "Stay Resilient"
author = "Lou Burruss"
date = "2008-06-03"
+++

_"You take away a team's strength and make them beat you with their weakness.
If they do, you make them do it again, because it’s their f***ing weakness!"_
— Jon Gewirtz  
  
This situation is so similar to what Jam did with Damien Scott in the 04
finals that I almost think that "The Huddle" ripped it right off of the video.
All season long, Damien had handled. He wasn’t a great hucker, but he could
always get open for a reset and hand a very nice forehand inside out. (Want to
see it? Watch the '04 videos).  
  
Until the finals, Alex Nord had been covering Damien and really destroying
him. Nord is big, quick and tenacious, but doesn’t have Damien’s out-and-out
foot speed in the open field. In the final, Damien ran deep, Idris Nolan
ripped it to him, and Jam got easy scores. We made an adjustment by putting
Blaine Robbins on Damien. Blaine was much less experienced, but fast enough to
keep pace with Damien and we got two blocks out of it. But mostly we followed
Jonny’s advice and worked to limit Damien’s reset and throwing opportunities
and shrugged our shoulders when he went deep.  
  
Kirk Savage of Furious used deep cuts successfully throughout his entire
career. The best defense we used against him were flexible, experienced
defenders. Typically, if a handler runs downfield from the area right around
the disc, defenders will let them go. Why bother chasing them when you know
they’re coming back to the disc? But if you let Kirk go, he’d be gone and
you’d be postered. So the experienced defender would pursue immediately when
he made a move to go downfield.
