+++
issue = "003"
title = "The Answer May Be On The Field Already"
author = "Tully Beatty"
date = "2008-06-03"
+++

I'll go ahead and assume we're pulling, so that will give our guy what we hope
to be two chances to make up for the first half, even the score, and allow us
to see if what was said at halftime served any purpose; or was the guy simply
standing there nodding his head like a boxer, in one ear and out the other,
all the while wondering if he should've run off to the Honey Bucket or maybe
he should put on a different wrist band, maybe someone has some tape he can
borrow, maybe some Gu will help, maybe some Red Bull, maybe he should go mess
around in his bag and look for something he knows isn't thereâ€”the things they
didn't carry.  
  
There are times when, despite your effort, you have to tip your hat and take
70. And of course there are other times when you have to say, f*** all that
s***, enough is enough. My feeling is that if this troublemaker is a handler,
then make him handle. I'm not against fronting him in order to push him away
from the disc, so I'd only buy in to half of that scouting report. It's
important to keep in mind that he's not a handler by himself. That is, he's
has someone to complete the chemistry and that guy may be the one to really
clamp down on. Someone else has to step in and step up and place tremendous
pressure on the other handler. And hopefully that defender isn't addressed
directly and instructed to step up. Simply, they know the drill and what's at
stake and their game becomes something that it wasn't before, because
obviously that is what our opponent has done with his game. And perhaps some
gamesmanship is in order: during a stoppage you whisper under your breath,
"Whatcha you gonna do, fluffy? You taking me deep? You gonna go deep?"  
  
And then again maybe not.  
  
Above all else, I'm looking at two defenders who know how to play an off-man
high count; I'm lucky if I can get one. So other than me, I'm looking for
someone a little more than half-witted. Immune to exhaustion with an overall
toughness about them and smart enough to know that once you've earned the
turn, you have to score, and while doing that, tire this guy out as much as
you can to make him twice the liability on the next point. If the right
adjustments have been made, then this stud will get more points in the 2nd
half than he did in the first. Maybe that proves to be the difference and he
gets extended and maybe a bit frustrated because the O isn't clicking like
they did in the first half. And maybe, just maybe, he finds his place in the
sun in the second half and then you and your team, but probably just you, walk
off seemingly content in knowing that the reward is in the effort, and
sometimes that's all there is.
