+++
issue = "003"
title = "What To Concede & What To Take Away"
author = "Chris Talarico"
date = "2008-06-03"
+++

This one is pretty straightforward: as with any player, you have to determine
what you want to give up and what you want to take away (or try to, anyway).
You're going to want to deny any player's greatest strength or whatever facet
of his game is capable of hurting you most. If this guy has beaten you
repeatedly with his throws, it doesn't seem like a very good idea to allow him
to get the disc underneath - even if he has caught a couple hucks today.
You're forcing him to do something he's not as good at, which is preferable to
allowing him to do what he's best at.  
  
So, without allowing him to come under (which, again, is a BAD idea), you have
a couple options:  
  
**1.** Continue to use the same defender(s) you've been using. Make it very
clear to your team that this guy now wants the deep pass, so expect the huck
and stay in a position that will give you a shot at it if it goes up. Also,
make sure your other downfield defenders are looking to help on a deep shot.
Still deny the underneath cut first, but don't give as big a cushion (stay 1
or 2 yards underneath him if you had been farther off). This is the least
strategic option, but if you're confident in the guy(s) who you've had
guarding him, this might be enough.  
  
**2.** You're probably going to need to guard this guy with someone who is
faster than he is. Put your best, fastest deep defender on him and continue
forcing him out. He's still going to have looks deep, but now he has to beat
your best guy if he's going to be successful. Clearly he has been a top option
for the other team - your best deep defender will hopefully make them think
twice about jacking one to him.  
  
_NOTE: If your best deep defender is not noticeably faster than this guy, you
may have to go to someone who is not as great in the air, but can beat the guy
with speed to gain position (i.e. beat him to the spot)._  
  
**3.** If you don't have anyone who can both deny the under and contest the
deep throws, you've got to make more drastic changes. Throw a zone. Play a
switching man that keeps at least one defender deep. Play any other defense
you have, because clearly you don't have a one-man answer for this guy.  
  
Or, if you don't like these options, you can go back to shutting down the deep
and allow him the underneath...and kick yourself after you lose for allowing
the same guy to beat you the same way. Again.
