+++
issue = "033"
title = "Get Your Team On One Page"
author = "Greg Husak"
date = "2011-06-28"
+++

The pre-game warmup can take on any number of forms, and I have seen
successful routines span a huge range, from individual to team wide and from
fully choreographed to ad hoc. In all cases, the general goal of the warmup
should be to get the body ready to perform at a peak performance. This will
require people to exert some energy, get a light sweat on and get the muscles
firing, and should also include a few throws to help players calibrate to the
conditions.  
  
One critical aspect to the chosen approach is that the team recognizes the
value and feels that the team gets best prepared to play through the selected
method. As a team, this buy-in to the method used will make a huge difference
in how mentally prepared the team is to play their best. The successful Condor
teams I played on derived strength from getting to the fields, doing
plyometrics as a group, and running through a few drills together. A lot of
the confidence in this approach came from the work some players did with
trainers. Jam teams that I played on also had a strict routine that players
enjoyed, involving plyometrics and drills, as well as a consistent playlist
that helped serve as a countdown to gametime. My interaction with players from
DoG revealed that they took pride in warming up individually, putting the
responsibility on each player to do what they needed to do to get ready. Iâ€™ve
seen other teams use half-field scrimmages to get the team warm and in game
mode.  
  
One issue that can occur is an overworking of the body in warmups. In ultimate
you usually have 3-4 games per day. At nationals there may be over an hour
between games, and so you have to figure out how to get your body ready
without exhausting yourself with a difficult regimen of exercises. In really
hot weather, a warmup for a second or third game may only consist of a couple
plyos and maybe a sprint or two. In cold weather, an extended jog just to get
the muscles loose may be required before an active warmup. Understanding your
body, and the condition of the team, will help determine how to to adjust
warmups to the conditions.  
  
This diversity of successful approaches to pre-game warmup indicates that
there may not be a single, superior warmup method. Certainly understanding the
basics of what is needed in a warmup, how to create and tailor a routine to
match the needs of an individual or team will determine what you or your team
does pre-game. Getting support from the whole team that the chosen approach,
while maybe not best for each individual, does the best job of getting the
whole team ready for the first pull is a critical component of a successful
pre-game warmup.
